film editingfilm editing is part of the creative post-production process of filmmaking. the term film editing is derived from the traditional process of working with film, but now it increasingly involves the use of digital technology. the film editor works with the raw footage, selecting shots and combining them into sequences to create a finished motion picture. film editing is described as an art or skill, the only art that is unique to cinema, separating filmmaking from other art forms that preceded it, although there are close parallels to the editing process in other art forms like poetry or novel writing. film editing is often referred to as the "invisible art" new york times, jan 6, 2008 because when it is well-practiced, the viewer can become so engaged that he or she is not even aware of the editor's work. on its most fundamental level, film editing is the art, technique, and practice of assembling shots into a coherent sequence. the job of an editor isn’t simply to mechanically put pieces of a film together, cut off film slates, or edit dialogue scenes. a film editor must creatively work with the layers of images, story, dialogue, music, pacing, as well as the actors' performances to effectively "re-imagine" and even rewrite the film to craft a cohesive whole. editors usually play a dynamic role in the making of a film. with the advent of digital editing, film editors and their assistants have become responsible for many areas of filmmaking that used to be the responsibility of others. for instance, in past years, picture editors dealt only with just that—picture. sound, music, and (more recently) visual effects editors dealt with the practicalities of other aspects of the editing process, usually under the direction of the picture editor and director. however, digital systems have increasingly put these responsibilities on the picture editor. it is common, especially on lower budget films, for the assistant editors or even the editor to cut in music, mock up visual effects, and add sound effects or other sound replacements. these temporary elements are usually replaced with more refined final elements by the sound, music, and visual effects teams hired to complete the picture. film editing is an art that can be used in diverse ways. it can create sensually provocative montages; become a laboratory for experimental cinema; bring out the emotional truth in an actor's performance; create a point of view on otherwise obtuse events; guide the telling and pace of a story; create an illusion of danger where there is none; give emphasis to things that would not have otherwise been noted; and even create a vital subconscious emotional connection to the viewer, among many other possibilities. == early experiments == early films by edison (whose company invented a motion camera and projector) and others were short films that were one long, static, locked-down shot. motion in the shot was all that was necessary to amuse an audience, so the first films simply showed activity such as traffic moving on a city street. there was no story and no editing. each film ran as long as there was film in the camera. in 1899, edison hired edwin stanton porter and soon put him in charge of his new york motion picture studio. porter is generally thought to be the american filmmaker who experimented with film editing. porter worked on a number of minor films before making life of an american fireman in 1903. the film was a breakthrough having a plot, action, and even a closeup of a hand pulling a fire alarm. the film comprises a continuous narrative over seven scenes, rendered in a total of nine shots. originally in edison films catalog, february 1903, 2-3; reproduced in charles musser, before the nickelodeon: edwin s. porter and the edison manufacturing company (berkeley: university of california press, 1991), 216-18. like all early filmmakers, he took ideas from others, and tried to improve on what he borrowed. in his jack and the beanstalk (1902) and life of an american fireman he followed earlier films by france's georges méliès and members of england's brighton school, such as james williamson. instead of using abrupt splices or cuts between shots, however, porter created dissolves, gradual transitions from one image to another. in life of an american fireman particularly, the technique helped audiences follow complex outdoor movement. porter continued to experiment with cinematic techniques in other films. the the great train robbery was ground-breaking and is still shown in film schools today as an example of early editing form. it was produced in 1903 and was one of the first examples of dynamic, action editing - piecing together scenes shot at different times and places and for emotional impact unavailable in a static long shot. being one of the first film hyphenates (film director, editor and engineer) porter also invented and utilized some of the very first (albeit primitive) special effects such as double exposures, miniatures and split-screens. porter discovered important aspects of motion picture language: that the screen image does not need to show a complete person from head to toe and that splicing together two shots creates in the viewer's mind a contextual relationship. these were the key discoveries that made all non-live or non live-on-videotape narrative motion pictures and television possible—that shots (in this case whole scenes since each shot is a complete scene) can be photographed at widely different locations over a period of time (hours, days or even months) and combined into a narrative whole. arthur knight (1957). p. 25. that is, the great train robbery contains scenes shot on sets of a telegraph station, a railroad car interior, and a dance hall, with outdoor scenes at a railroad water tower, on the train itself, at a point along the track, and in the woods. but when the robbers leave the telegraph station interior (set) and emerge at the water tower, the audience believes they went immediately from one to the other. or that when they climb on the train in one shot and enter the baggage car (a set) in the next, the audience believes they are on the same train. sometime around 1918, russian director lev kuleshov did an experiment that proves this point. (see kuleshov experiment) he took an old film clip of a head shot of a noted russian actor and intercut the shot with a shot of a bowl of soup, then with a child playing with a teddy bear, then with a shot an elderly woman in a casket. when he showed the film to people they praised the actor's acting—the hunger in his face when he saw the soup, the delight in the child, and the grief when looking at the dead woman. arthur knight (1957). pp. 72-73. of course, the shot of the actor was years before the other shots and he never "saw" any of the items. the simple act of juxtaposing the shots in a sequence made the relationship. == history of film editing technology == the original editing machine: an upright moviola. steenbeck film editing machine rollers before the widespread use of non-linear editing systems, the initial editing of all films was done with a positive copy of the film negative called a film workprint (cutting copy in uk) by physically cutting and pasting together pieces of film, using a splicer and threading the film on a machine with a viewer such as a moviola, or "flatbed" machine such as a k.-e.-m. or steenbeck. today, most films are edited digitally (on systems such as avid or final cut pro) and bypass the film positive workprint altogether. in the past, the use of a film positive (not the original negative) allowed the editor to do as much experimenting as he or she wished, without the risk of damaging the original. when the film workprint had been cut to a satisfactory state, it was then used to make an edit decision list (edl). the negative cutter referred to this list while processing the negative, splitting the shots into rolls, which were then contact printed to produce the final film print or answer print. today, production companies have the option of bypassing negative cutting altogether. with the advent of digital intermediate ("di"), the physical negative does not necessarily need to be physically cut and hot spliced together; rather the negative is optically scanned into computer(s) and a cut list is conformed by a di editor. == post-production == === editor's cut === there are several editing stages and the editor's cut is the first. an editor's cut (sometimes referred to as the "assembly edit" or "rough cut") is normally the first pass of what the final film will be when it reaches picture lock. the film editor usually starts working while principal photography starts. likely, prior to cutting, the editor and director will have seen and/or discussed "dailies" (raw footage shot each day) as shooting progresses. screening dailies gives the editor a ballpark idea of the director's intentions. because it is the first pass, the editor's cut might be longer than the final film. the editor continues to refine the cut while shooting continues, and often the entire editing process goes on for many months and sometimes more than a year, depending on the film. === director's cut === when shooting is finished, the director can then turn his full attention to collaborating with the editor and further refining the cut of the film. this is the time that is set aside where the film editor's first cut is molded to fit the director's vision. in the united states, under dga rules, directors receive a minimum of ten weeks after completion of principal photography to prepare their first cut. while collaborating on what is referred to as the "director's cut", the director and the editor go over the entire movie with a fine-tooth comb; scenes and shots are re-ordered, removed, shortened and otherwise tweaked. often it is discovered that there are plot holes, missing shots or even missing segments which might require that new scenes be filmed. because of this time working closely and collaborating ndash; a period that is normally far longer, and far more intimately involved, than the entire production and filming ndash; most directors and editors form a unique artistic bond. === final cut === often after the director has had his chance to oversee a cut, the subsequent cuts are supervised by one or more producers, who represent the production company and/or movie studio. there have been several conflicts in the past between the director and the studio, sometimes leading to the use of the "alan smithee" credit signifying when a director no longer wants to be associated with the final release. ==continuity== continuity is a film term that suggests that a series of shots should be physically continuous, as if the camera simply changed angles in the course of a single event. for instance, if in one shot a beer glass is empty, it should not be full in the next shot. live coverage of a sporting event would be an example of footage that is very continuous. since the live operators are cutting from one live feed to another, the physical action of the shots matches very closely. many people regard inconsistencies in continuity as mistakes, and often the editor is blamed. in film, however, continuity is very nearly last on a film editor's list of important things to maintain. technically, continuity is the responsibility of the script supervisor and film director, who are together responsible for preserving continuity and preventing errors from take to take and shot to shot. the script supervisor, who sits next to the director during shooting, keeps the physical continuity of the edit in mind as shots are set up. he is the editor's watchman. if shots are taken out of sequence, as is often the case, he will be alert to make sure that that beer glass is in the appropriate state. the editor utilizes the script supervisor's notes during post-production to log and keep track of the vast amounts of footage and takes that a director might shoot. == methods of montage == in motion picture terminology, a montage (from the french for "putting together" or "assembly") is a film editing technique. there are at least three senses of the term: # in french film practice, "montage" has its literal french meaning (assembly, installation) and simply identifies editing. # in soviet filmmaking of the 1920s, "montage" was a method of juxtaposing shots to derive new meaning that did not exist in either shot alone. # in classical hollywood cinema, a "montage sequence" is a short segment in a film in which narrative information is presented in a condensed fashion. === soviet montage === lev kuleshov was among the very first to theorize about the relatively young medium of the cinema in the 1920s. for him, the unique essence of the cinema — that which could be duplicated in no other medium — is editing. he argues that editing a film is like constructing a building. brick-by-brick (shot-by-shot) the building (film) is erected. his often-cited kuleshov experiment established that montage can lead the viewer to reach certain conclusions about the action in a film. montage works because viewers infer meaning based on context. although, strictly speaking, u.s. film director d.w. griffith was not part of the montage school, he was one of the early proponents of the power of editing — mastering cross-cutting to show parallel action in different locations, and codifying film grammar in other ways as well. griffith's work in the teens was highly regarded by kuleshov and other soviet filmmakers and greatly influenced their understanding of editing. sergei eisenstein was briefly a student of kuleshov's, but the two parted ways because they had different ideas of montage. eisenstein regarded montage as a dialectical means of creating meaning. by contrasting unrelated shots he tried to provoke associations in the viewer, which were induced by shocks. === montage sequence === a montage sequence consists of a series of short shots that are edited into a sequence to condense narrative. it is usually used to advance the story as a whole (often to suggest the passage of time), rather than to create symbolic meaning. in many cases, a song plays in the background to enhance the mood or reinforce the message being conveyed. one famous example of montage was seen in the 1968 film 2001: a space odyssey, depicting the start of man's first development from apes to humans. == continuity editing == what became known as the popular 'classical hollywood' style of editing was developed by early european and american directors, in particular d.w. griffith in his films such as the birth of a nation and intolerance. the classical style ensures temporal and spatial continuity as a way of advancing narrative, using such techniques as the 180 degree rule, establishing shot, and shot reverse shot. == alternatives to continuity editing (non-traditional or experimental) == early russian filmmakers such as lev kuleshov further explored and theorized about editing and its ideological nature. sergei eisenstein developed a system of editing that was unconcerned with the rules of the continuity system of classical hollywood that he called intellectual montage. alternatives to traditional editing were also the folly of early surrealist and dada filmmakers such as luis buñuel (director of the 1929 un chien andalou) and rené clair (director of 1924's entr'acte which starred famous dada artists marcel duchamp and man ray). both filmmakers, clair and buñuel, experimented with editing techniques long before what is referred to as "mtv style" editing. the french new wave filmmakers such as jean luc godard and françois truffaut and their american counterparts such as andy warhol and john cassavetes also pushed the limits of editing technique during the late 1950s and throughout the 1960s. french new wave films and the non-narrative films of the 1960s used a carefree editing style and did not conform to the traditional editing etiquette of hollywood films. like its dada and surrealist predecessors, french new wave editing often drew attention to itself by its lack of continuity, its demystifying self-reflexive nature (reminding the audience that they were watching a film), and by the overt use of jump cuts or the insertion of material not often related to any narrative. == editing techniques == vsevolod pudovkin noted that the editing process is the one phase of production that is truly unique to motion pictures. every other aspect of film making originated in a different medium than film (photography, art direction, writing, sound recording), but editing is the one process that is unique to film. kubrick was quoted as saying: "i love editing. i think i like it more than any other phase of film making. if i wanted to be frivolous, i might say that everything that precedes editing is merely a way of producing film to edit." walker, alexander, stanley kubrick directs, new york: harcourt brace jovanovich, 1972. * edward dmytryk stipulates seven "rules of cutting" that a good editor should follow: dmytryk, edward, on film editing, new york ** "rule 1: never make a cut without a positive reason." ** "rule 2: when undecided about the exact frame to cut on, cut long rather than short." dmytryk, p.23 ** "rule 3: whenever possible cut 'in movement'." dmytryk, p.27 ** "rule 4: the 'fresh' is preferable to the 'stale'." dmytryk, p.37 ** "rule 5: all scenes should begin and end with continuing action." dmytryk, p.38 ** "rule 6: cut for proper values rather than proper 'matches'." dmytryk, p.44 ** "rule 7: substance first—then form." dmytryk, p.145 * according to walter murch, when it comes to film editing, there are six main criteria for evaluating a cut or deciding where to cut. they are (in order of importance, most important first, with notional percentage values.): ** emotion (51%) — does the cut reflect what the editor believes the audience should be feeling at that moment? ** story (23%) — does the cut advance the story? ** rhythm (10%) — does the cut occur "at a moment that is rhythmically interesting and 'right'" (murch, 18)? ** eye-trace (7%) — does the cut pay respect to "the location and movement of the audience's focus of interest within the frame" (murch, 18)? ** two-dimensional plane of the screen (5%) — does the cut respect the 180 degree rule? ** three-dimensional space of action (4%) — is the cut true to the physical/spatial relationships within the diegesis? murch assigned the notional percentage values to each of the criteria. "emotion, at the top of the list, is the thing that you should try to preserve at all costs. if you find you have to sacrifice certain of those six things to make a cut, sacrifice your way up, item by item, from the bottom."-murch == references == ;bibliography * dmytryk, edward (1984). on film editing: an introduction to the art of film construction. focal press, boston. *eisenstein, sergei (2010). towards a theory of montage. tauris, london. isbn 978-1-84885-356-0 *knight, arthur (1957). the liveliest art. mentor books. new american library. ;notes ;further reading * morales, morante, luis fernando (2000). teoría y práctica de la edición en video. universidad de san martin de porres, lima, perú * murch, walter (2001). in the blink of an eye: a perspective on film editing. silman-james press. 2d rev. ed.. isbn 1-879505-62-2 == see also == * 180 degree rule * 30 degree rule * a roll (footage) * b roll * cinematic techniques *clapperboard * compositing (keying) * cut (transition), for the director's call cut! ** axial cut ** cross-cutting ** fast cutting ** jump cut ** long take ** match cut ** slow cutting * cutaway * edit decision list (edl) * film transition ** dissolve ** l cut (split edit) ** wipe * filmmaking * kuleshov effect * list of film-related topics * motion picture editors guild (mpeg) * motion picture terminology * moviola * re-edited film * scene * sequence * shot ** establishing shot ** insert ** master shot ** point of view shot ** shot reverse shot * video editing === wikibooks === * mewa film user's guide * movie making manual === wikiversity === * portal:filmmaking
film festivala film festival is an organised, extended presentation of films in one or more movie theaters or screening venues, usually in a single locality. increasingly film festivals show part of their films to the public by adding outdoor movie screenings. examples of outdoor movie screenings at film festivals the films may be of recent date and, depending upon the focus of the individual festival, can include international releases as well as films produced by the organisers' domestic film industry. sometimes there is a focus on a specific film-maker or genre (e.g., film noir) or subject matter (e.g., horror film festivals). a number of film festivals specialise in short films, each with its defined maximum length. film festivals are typically annual events. probably the best-known and most noteworthy film festival in the world is the cannes film festival. other important and prestigous film festivals include that held in berlin and venice (oldest film festival). ==history== the first major film festival was held in venice in 1932; the other major and oldest film festivals of the world are: cannes film festival (1946), festival del film locarno (1946), karlovy vary international film festival (1946), edinburgh international film festival (1947), melbourne international film festival (1951), berlin international film festival (1951) and toronto international film festival (1976). the edinburgh international film festival in the uk was established in 1947 and is the longest continually running film festival in the world. raindance film festival is the uk's largest celebration of independent film-making and is taking place in london in october. the first north american high film festival was the columbus international film  video festival, also known as the chris awards, held in 1953. according to the film arts foundation in san francisco, "the chris awards (is) one of the most prestigious documentary, educational, business and informational competitions in the u.s; (it is) the oldest of its kind in north america and celebrating its 54th year." it was followed four years later by the san francisco international film festival held in march 1957 whose emphasis was on feature-length dramatic films. the festival played a major role in introducing foreign films to american audiences. among the films shown in its founding year were akira kurosawa's throne of blood and satyajit ray's pather panchali. today there are thousands of film festivals around the world, ranging from high profile festivals such as sundance film festival and slamdance film festival (park city, ut) to horror festivals such as terror film festival (philadelphia, pa), and the first u.s. film festival dedicated to honoring the impact of music in film: the park city film music festival: http://www.pcfmf.com. digital feature film distribution began in 2005, along with the arrival of the world's first online film festival, the greencine online film festival, sponsored by divx. ==entry fee== most film festivals require filmmakers to pay an entry fee to have their works considered for screening. this is especially commonplace among larger film festivals, such as the cannes film festival, toronto international film festival, sundance film festival, south by southwest and even smaller "boutique" festivals such as the miami international film festival and the british urban film festival in london. however, not all film festivals require an entry fee. rotterdam film festival and mumbai film festival (www.mumbaifilmfest.com) in india, for example, does not charge an entry fee to submit work. there are also many smaller film festivals in the united states, such as the stony brook film festival in long island, new york, the northwest filmmakers' festival, or the sicilian film festival in miami, florida, which do not charge entry fees; however, acceptance of films is usually more limited, and such film festivals do not necessarily attract big names in their audiences like sundance and telluride do. in some cases, such as the portland international film festival, there is an entry fee, but it is waived for filmmakers within a certain region, such as the northwestern united states. ==significant or notable festivals== red carpet of the cannes film festival at the palais des festivals et des congrès, cannes. traverse city film festival and their giant inflatable movie screen the three most prestigious film festivals are commonly regarded to be that of cannes, berlin and venice; these festivals are sometimes called the "big three." european film and animation festivals polish director krzysztof kieślowski's the three colors trilogy were each made for these festivals, with colors: blue|blue] for venice, colors: white|white] for berlin, and colors: red|red] for cannes. the toronto international film festival is north america's most popular festival. time wrote it had "grown from its place as the most influential fall film festival to the most influential film festival, period." seattle international film festival is credited as being the largest film festival in the usa, regularly showing over 400 films in a month across the city. the sundance film festival, tribeca film festival, austin film festival, new york film festival, montreal world film festival, and vancouver international film festival are also major festivals in north america. * competitive feature film: the festivals in berlin, cairo, cannes, goa, karlovy vary, locarno, mar del plata, montreal, moscow, san sebastián, shanghai, tokyo, venice, and warsaw are accredited by the international federation of film producers associations (fiapf) in the category of competitive feature films. *experimental films: ann arbor film festival was started in 1963. it is the oldest continually operated experimental film festival in north america and has become one of the premiere film festivals for independent and, primarily, experimental filmmakers to showcase their work. *independent films: in the us, telluride film festival, sundance film festival, redford says sundance maintains essence filmmakers look to sundance buying spree austin film festival, austin's south by southwest, new york city's tribeca film festival and slamdance film festival are all considered significant festivals for independent film. the zero film festival is significant as the first and only festival exclusive to self-financed filmmakers. the biggest independent film festival in the uk is raindance film festival. *north american: the san francisco international film festival, started in 1957, is the oldest continuously running film festival in the americas. it highlights current trends in international filmmaking and video production with an emphasis on work that has not yet secured u.s. distribution. the toronto international film festival, begun in 1976, is regarded as north america's most major and most prestigious film festival, and is the most widely attended worldwide. toronto's hot docs is the leading north american documentary film festival. toronto also has the largest amount of film festivals in the world, ranging from cultural, independent, and historic films. the largest festival, in terms of the number of features shown, is the seattle international film festival, screening 270 features, and approximately 150 short films. the whistler film festival, with is amazing location and breathtaking scenery, is getting bigger every year with more than 80 screenings and a well-rounded industry summit. meanwhile, the new york film festival only shows a few films in each year, but it still has big impact in the united states. the sundance film festival is a major festival for independent film. the vail film festival in vail, colorado, is one of the "top 10 destination film festivals in the world" (moviemaker magazine), screens over 90 films, features mostly new filmmakers and honors rising stars, including jesse esienberg, olivia wilde, and many more. for short film enthusiasts and cinema professionals, sagunenay international short film festival (regard sur le court métrage au saguenay, in french) is now a "must-go event" (francois levesque, le devoir). the slamdance film festival is self-governed "by filmmakers for filmmakers". *latin american significance: the cartagena film festival, founded by victor nieto in 1960, is the oldest film festival in latin america. the festival de gramado (or gramado film festival) gramado, brazil along with the guadalajara international film festival in guadalajara, mexico are considered to be the most important film festivals of latin america. it was first held in 1973, awarding latin american films. the huelva ibero-american film festival has been held since 1975 in that spanish city. while the expresión en corto international film festival is the largest competitive film festival in mexico, specializing in emerging talents, and is held each year during the last week of july in the two colonial cities of san miguel de allende and guanajuato. oaxaca film fest rapidly emerging as one of the most important of southern mexico's. among spanish speaking countries the dominican international film festival is held annually in puerto plata, dr, the valdivia international film festival is held annually in the city of valdivia. it is arguable the most important film festival in chile. *animation: founded in 1960, the annecy international animated film festival is the oldest international film festival dedicated exclusively to animation. the others are: zagreb (f. 1972) ottawa (f. 1976), hiroshima (f. 1985), krok (f. 1989), and anima mundi (f. 1992). there are also a variety of regional festivals in various countries. austin film festival is accredited by the academy of motion picture arts  sciences®, making all jury award-winning narrative short and animated short films eligible for an academy award®. *asian film festival: most notable amongst the asian film festivals are the annual mumbai film festival in india, with its 200,000 usd cash prize (www.mumbaifilmfest.com), osian's-cinefan film festival, which was recently expanded to include arab cinema as well, and the hong kong international film festival (hkiff) and busan international film festival (biff). *african festivals significant african festivals based on the continent include the biannual panafrican film and television festival of ouagadougou fespaco in burkina faso, the annual durban international film festival which has grown in importance for industry with the addition of a co-production forum and talent campus. *european festivals the biggest european festival is the cannes film festival in france along with berlin and venice. *art and technology: cinequest film festival is one of the largest film festival in the united states to celebrate the convergence of art and technology. forbes magazine recognized the festival and how their "film and technology forums delved into the important realms of integrating internet delivery into the home entertainment environment, creating true internet revenue streams for film artists, and effectively leveraging the budding mobile marketplace." *emerging filmmakers: the kahbang film festival, part of the kahbang music-art-film festival in bangor, maine, is one of the newest film festivals in the united states to discover and showcase the work from emerging filmmakers throughout the world. their programming continues to be unique by also showcasing the best new comedy features, music documentaries, and maine made films. each year they honor one notable actor, actress, or filmmaker with the "kevin norwood bacon award for achievement in cinema", acknowledging the success the recipient has achieved in being so closely connected to kevin bacon. one of their films is screened in the kahbang off screen category, "six degrees of kevin bacon" which connects the honored back to the man himself. the london short film festival is a bafta-affiliated festival which takes place in january every year and is dedicated to finding and showcasing the work of new uk talent, including specific screenings for low budget work. *national cinemas: there has been an increasing presence of film festivals celebrating national cinema. large national cinema festivals include italian, french, russian, korean, spanish, german and many more. these are often held in cities with large diaspora populations. this year, sydney hosted the world’s largest lebanese film festival. *interdisciplinary: there are an increasing number of interdisciplinary film festivals crossing film exhibition with content form other cultural and professional spheres. rich pickings uses short films as a discussion aid for public conversations between with scientists, technologists, psychoanalysts and filmmakers. ==see also== * list of film festivals * list of short film festival * outdoor cinema ==references== ==further reading== *turan, kenneth, sundance to sarajevo: film festivals and the world they made, los angeles, university of california press, 2002, hardback, isbn 0-520-21867-1. * watson, nigel, "the sense and sensationalism of film festivals", talking pictures website
history of filmthe history of film (known variously as film, motion pictures or movies) microsoft® encarta® encyclopedia 2003. © 1993-2002 microsoft corporation. began in the late 1880s with the invention of the first movie camera. motion pictures were initially exhibited as a carnival novelty and developed to one of the most important tools of communication and entertainment, and mass media in the 20th century and into the 21st century. most films before 1930 were silent. motion picture films have substantially affected the arts, technology, and politics. the movie theatre was considered a cheaper, simpler way to provide entertainment to the masses. movies became the most popular visual art form of the late victorian age. it was simpler because of the fact that before the cinema people would have to travel long distances to see major dioramas or amusement parks. with the advent of the cinema this changed. during the first decade of the cinema's existence, inventors worked to improve the machines for making and showing films. ==the beginning of film production== ===precursors of film=== one of the first technological precursors of film is the pinhole camera, followed by the more advanced camera obscura, which was first described in detail by alhazen in his book of optics (1021), david h. kelley, exploring ancient skies: an encyclopedic survey of archaeoastronomy: bradley steffens (2006), ibn al-haytham: first scientist, chapter five, morgan reynolds publishing, isbn 1-59935-024-6 and later perfected by giambattista della porta. light is inverted through a small hole or lens from outside, and projected onto a surface or screen. using camera obscura, it was possible to project a moving image, but there was no means of recording the image for later viewing. in 1739 and 1748, david hume published a treatise of human nature and an enquiry concerning human understanding, arguing for the associations and causes of ideas with visual images, in some sense forerunners to the language of film. moving images were produced on revolving drums and disks in the 1830s with independent invention by simon von stampfer (stroboscope) in austria, joseph plateau (phenakistoscope) in belgium and william horner (zoetrope) in britain. on june 19, 1872, under the sponsorship of leland stanford, eadweard muybridge successfully photographed a horse named "sallie gardner" in fast motion using a series of 24 stereoscopic cameras. the experiment took place on june 11 at the palo alto farm in california with the press present. the exercise was meant to determine whether a running horse ever had all four legs lifted off the ground at once. the cameras were arranged along a track parallel to the horse's, and each camera shutter was controlled by a trip wire which was triggered by the horse's hooves. they were 21 inches apart to cover the 20 feet taken by the horse stride, taking pictures at one thousandth of a second. étienne-jules marey invented a chronophotographic gun in 1882, which was capable of taking 12 consecutive frames a second, recording all the frames on the same picture. he used the chronophotographic gun for studying animals and human locomotion. thumb the second experimental film, roundhay garden scene, filmed by louis le prince on october 14, 1888 in roundhay, leeds, england, is now known as the earliest surviving motion picture. on june 21, 1889, william friese-greene was issued patent no. 10131 for his 'chronophotographic' camera. it was apparently capable of taking up to ten photographs per second using perforated celluloid film. a report on the camera was published in the british photographic news on february 28, 1890. on 18 march, friese-greene sent a clipping of the story to thomas edison, whose laboratory had been developing a motion picture system known as the kinetoscope. the report was reprinted in scientific american on april 19. braun, marta, picturing time: the work of etienne-jules marey (1830–1904) (chicago: university of chicago press, 1992/isbn 0-226-07173-1), p. 190; robinson, david, from peepshow to palace: the birth of american film (new york and chichester, west sussex: columbia university press, 1997/isbn 0-231-10338-7), p. 28. friese-greene gave a public demonstration in 1890 but the low frame rate combined with the device's apparent unreliability failed to make an impression. as a result of the work of étienne-jules marey and eadweard muybridge, many researchers in the late 19th century realized that films as they are known today were a practical possibility, but the first to design a fully successful apparatus was w. k. l. dickson, working under the direction of thomas alva edison. his fully developed camera, called the kinetograph, was patented in 1891 and took a series of instantaneous photographs on standard eastman kodak photographic emulsion coated on to a transparent celluloid strip 35 mm wide. the results of this work were first shown in public in 1893, using the viewing apparatus also designed by dickson, and called the kinetoscope. this was contained within a large box, and only permitted the images to be viewed by one person at a time looking into it through a peephole, after starting the machine by inserting a coin. it was not a commercial success in this form, and left the way free for charles francis jenkins and his projector, the phantoscope, with the first showing before an audience in june 1894. louis and auguste lumière perfected the cinématographe, an apparatus that took, printed, and projected film. they gave their first show of projected pictures to an audience in paris in december 1895. after this date, the edison company developed its own form of projector, as did various other inventors. some of these used different film widths and projection speeds, but after a few years the 35-mm wide edison film, and the 16-frames-per-second projection speed of the lumière cinématographe became standard. the other important american competitor was the american mutoscope  biograph company, which used a new camera designed by dickson after he left the edison company. at the chicago 1893 world's columbian exposition, muybridge gave a series of lectures on the science of animal locomotion in the zoopraxographical hall, built specially for that purpose in the "midway plaisance" arm of the exposition. he used his zoopraxiscope to show his moving pictures to a paying public, making the hall the first commercial film theater. william kennedy laurie dickson, chief engineer with the edison laboratories, is credited with the invention of a practicable form of a celluloid strip containing a sequence of images, the basis of a method of photographing and projecting moving images. celluloid blocks were thinly sliced, then removed with heated pressure plates. after this, they were coated with a photosensitive gelatin emulsion. in 1893 at the chicago world's fair, thomas edison introduced to the public two pioneering inventions based on this innovation; the kinetograph – the first practical moving picture camera – and the kinetoscope. the latter was a cabinet in which a continuous loop of dickson's celluloid film (powered by an electric motor) was back lit by an incandescent lamp and seen through a magnifying lens. the spectator viewed the image through an eye piece. kinetoscope parlours were supplied with fifty-foot film snippets photographed by dickson, in edison's "black maria" studio (pronounced like "ma-rye-ah"). these sequences recorded both mundane incidents, such as fred ott's sneeze, and entertainment acts, such as acrobats, music hall performers and boxing demonstrations. kinetoscope parlors soon spread successfully to europe. edison, however, never attempted to patent these instruments on the other side of the atlantic, since they relied so greatly on previous experiments and innovations from britain and europe. this enabled the development of imitations, such as the camera devised by british electrician and scientific instrument maker robert w. paul and his partner birt acres. in 1887 ottomar anschütz, wanting to display moving pictures to large groups of people, presented his electrotachyscope that used 24 images on a rotating glass disk. faszination der bewegung: ottomar anschütz zwischen photographie und kino p. 185, deac rossell. isbn 3-87877-774-4 in 1894 his invention projected moving images industry, liberty, and a vision: wordsworth donisthorpe's kinesigraph, stephen herbert, p. 13, isbn 0-9523941-3-8 in berlin. at about the same time, in lyon, france, auguste and louis lumière invented the cinematograph, a portable camera, printer, and projector. in late 1895 in paris, father antoine lumière began exhibitions of projected films before the paying public, beginning the general conversion of the medium to projection (cook, 1990). they quickly became europe's main producers with their actualités like workers leaving the lumière factory and comic vignettes like the sprinkler sprinkled (both 1895). even edison, initially dismissive of projection, joined the trend with the vitascope, a modified jenkins' phantoscope, within less than six months. the first public motion-picture film presentation in the world, though, belongs to max and emil skladanowsky of berlin, who projected with their apparatus "bioscop", a flickerfree duplex construction, november 1 through 31, 1895. that same year in may, in the usa, eugene augustin lauste devised his eidoloscope for the latham family. but the first public screening of film ever is due to jean aimé "acme" le roy, a french photographer. on february 5, 1894, his 40th birthday, he presented his "marvellous cinematograph" to a group of around twenty show business men in new york city. the films of the time were seen mostly via temporary storefront spaces and traveling exhibitors or as acts in vaudeville programs. a film could be under a minute long and would usually present a single scene, authentic or staged, of everyday life, a public event, a sporting event or slapstick. there was little to no cinematic technique: no editing and usually no camera movement, and flat, stagey compositions. but the novelty of realistically moving photographs was enough for a motion picture industry to mushroom before the end of the century, in countries around the world. "the cinema was to offer a cheaper, simpler way of providing entertainment to the masses. filmmakers could record actors' performances, which then could be shown to audiences around the world. travelogues would bring the sights of far-flung places, with movement, directly to spectators' hometowns. movies would become the most popular visual art form of the late late victorian age" bordwell, david and thompson, kristen. (2003) "film history an introduction". new york: mcgraw-hill company inc.p.13 ==the silent era== a scene from "a trip to the moon" (1902) by georges méliès. initially, there were technical difficulties in synchronizing images with sound. it was clear that edison originally intended to create a sound film system, which would not gain worldwide recognition until the release of "the jazz singer" in 1927. however, there was still significant interest in motion pictures for films to be produced without sound. this is referred to as the silent era of film. however, to enhance the viewers' experience, silent films were commonly accompanied by live musicians and sometimes sound effects and even commentary spoken by the showman or projectionist. in most countries, intertitles came to be used to provide dialogue and narration for the film, thus dispensing with narrators, but in japanese cinema human narration remained popular throughout the silent era. the technical problems were resolved by 1923. illustrated songs were a notable exception to this trend that began in 1894 in vaudeville houses and persisted as late as the late 1930s in film theaters. live performance or sound recordings were paired with hand-colored glass slides projected through stereopticons and similar devices. in this way, song narrative was illustrated through a series of slides whose changes were simultaneous with the narrative development. the main purpose of illustrated songs was to encourage sheet music sales, and they were highly successful with sales reaching into the millions for a single song. later, with the birth of film, illustrated songs were used as filler material preceding films and during reel changes. === 1895 to 1906=== the first eleven years of motion pictures show the cinema moving from a novelty to an established large-scale entertainment industry. the films represent a movement from films consisting of one shot, completely made by one person with a few assistants, towards films several minutes long consisting of several shots, which were made by large companies in something like industrial conditions. ====film business up to 1906==== the first commercial exhibition of film took place on april 14, 1894 at edison's kinetoscope peep-show parlor. the most successful motion picture company in the united states, with the largest production until 1900, was the american mutoscope company. this was initially set up to exploit peep-show type films using designs made by w.k.l. dickson after he left the edison company in 1895. his equipment used 70 mm. wide film, and each frame was printed separately onto paper sheets for insertion into their viewing machine, called the mutoscope. the image sheets stood out from the periphery of a rotating drum, and flipped into view in succession. by 1896, it was clear that more money could be made by showing motion picture films with a projector to a large audience than exhibiting them in peep-show machines. the edison company took up a projector developed by armat and jenkins, the "phantoscope", which was renamed the vitascope, and it joined various projecting machines made by other people to show the 480 mm. width films being made by the edison company and others in france and the uk. besides the mutoscope, american mutoscope also made a projector called the biograph, which could project a continuous positive film print made from the same negatives. from 1896 there was continuous litigation in the united states over the patents covering the basic mechanisms that made motion pictures possible. ====film production==== besides american mutoscope, there were also numerous smaller producers in the united states, and some of them established a long-term presence in the new century. american vitagraph, one of these minor producers, built studios in brooklyn, and expanded its operations in 1905. in france, the lumière company sent cameramen all round the world from 1896 onwards to shoot films, which were exhibited locally by the cameramen, and then sent back to the company factory in lyon to make prints for sale to whoever wanted them. there were nearly a thousand of these films made up to 1901, nearly all of them actualities. by 1898 georges méliès was the largest producer of fiction films in france, and from this point onwards his output was almost entirely films featuring trick effects, which were very successful in all markets. the special popularity of his longer films, which were several minutes long from 1899 onwards (while most other films were still only a minute long), led other makers to start producing longer films. in 1900 charles pathé began film production under the pathé-frères brand, with ferdinand zecca hired to actually make the films. by 1905, pathé was the largest film company in the world, a position it retained until world war i. léon gaumont began film production in 1896, with his production supervised by alice guy. in the uk, robert w. paul, james williamson and g.a. smith and the other lesser producers were joined by cecil hepworth in 1899, and in a few years he was turning out 100 films a year, with his company becoming the largest on the british scene. ====film exhibition==== initially films were mostly shown as a novelty in special venues, but the main methods of exhibition quickly became either as an item on the programmes of variety theatres, or by traveling showman in tent theatres, which they took around the fairs in country towns. it became the practice for the producing companies to sell prints outright to the exhibitors, at so much per foot, regardless of the subject. typical prices initially were 15 cents a foot in the united states, and one shilling a foot in britain. hand-coloured films, which were being produced of the most popular subjects before 1900, cost 2 to 3 times as much per foot. there were a few producers, such as the american mutoscope and biograph company, which did not sell their films, but exploited them solely with their own exhibition units. the first successful permanent theatre showing only films was "the nickelodeon", which was opened in pittsburgh in 1905. by then there were enough films several minutes long available to fill a programme running for at least half an hour, and which could be changed weekly when the local audience became bored with it. other exhibitors in the united states quickly followed suit, and within a couple of years there were thousands of these nickelodeons in operation. the american experience led to a worldwide boom in the production and exhibition of films from 1906 onwards. ====animation==== the most important development in this area of special techniques occurred, arguably, in 1899, with the production of the short film matches: an appeal, a thirty-second long stop-motion animated piece intended to encourage the audience to send matches to british troops fighting the boer war. the relative sophistication of this piece was not followed up for some time, with subsequent works in animation being limited to short, two or three frame effects, such as appeared in edwin stanton porter's 1902 short "fun in a bakery shop", where a lump of dough was made to smile over the course of a three-frame sequence. works rivaling the british short in length did not appear until 1905, when edwin porter made how jones lost his roll, and the whole dam family and the dam dog. both of these films had intertitles which were formed by the letters moving into place from a random scattering to form the words of the titles. this was done by exposing the film one frame at a time, and moving the letters a little bit towards their final position between each exposure. this is what has come to be called "single frame animation" or "object animation", and it needs a slightly adapted camera that exposes only one frame for each turn of the crank handle, rather than the usual eight frames per turn. in 1906, albert edward smith and james stuart blackton at vitagraph took the next step, and in their humorous phases of funny faces, what appear to be cartoon drawings of people move from one pose to another. this is done for most of the length of this film by moving jointed cut-outs of the figures frame by frame between the exposures, just as porter moved his letters. however, there is a very short section of the film where things are made to appear to move by altering the drawings themselves from frame to frame, which is how standard animated cartoons have since been made up to today. ====narrative film construction==== the way forward to making films made up of more than one shot was led by films of the life of jesus christ. the first of these was made in france in 1897, and it was followed in the same year by a film of the passion play staged yearly in the czech town of horitz. this was filmed by americans for exhibition outside the german-speaking world and was presented in special venues, not as a continuous film, but with the separate scenes interspersed with lantern slides, a lecture, and live choral numbers, to increase the running time of the spectacle to about 90 minutes. films of acted reproductions of scenes from the greco-turkish war were made by georges méliès in 1897, and although sold separately, these were no doubt shown in continuous sequence by exhibitors. in 1898 a few films of similar kind were made, but still none had continuous action moving from one shot into the next. the multi-shot films that georges méliès made in 1899 were much longer than those made by anybody else, but l'affaire dreyfus (the dreyfus case) and cendrillon (cinderella) still contained no action moving from one shot to the next one. also, from cendrillon onwards, méliès made a dissolve between every shot in his films, which reduced any appearance of action continuity even further. to understand what is going on in both these films, the audience had to know their stories beforehand, or be told them by a presenter. ====film continuity==== the two scenes making up come along, do! real film continuity, which means showing action moving from one shot into another joined to it, can be dated to robert w. paul's come along, do!, made in 1898. in the first shot of this film, an old couple outside an art exhibition follow other people inside through the door. the second shot showed what they do inside. the further development of action continuity in multi-shot films continued in 1899. in the latter part of that year, george albert smith, working in brighton, made the kiss in the tunnel. this started with a shot from a "phantom ride" at the point at which the train goes into a tunnel, and continued with the action on a set representing the interior of a railway carriage, where a man steals a kiss from a woman, and then cuts back to the phantom ride shot when the train comes out of the tunnel. a month later, the bamforth company in yorkshire made a restaged version of this film under the same title, and in this case they filmed shots of a train entering and leaving a tunnel from beside the tracks, which they joined before and after their version of the kiss inside the train compartment. in 1900, continuity of action across successive shots was definitively established by george albert smith and james williamson, who also worked in brighton. in that year smith made seen through the telescope, in which the main shot shows street scene with a young man tying the shoelace and then caressing the foot of his girlfriend, while an old man observes this through a telescope. there is then a cut to close shot of the hands on the girl's foot shown inside a black circular mask, and then a cut back to the continuation of the original scene. the first two shots of seen through the telescope (1900), with the telescope pov simulated by the circular mask. even more remarkable is james williamson's attack on a china mission station, made around the same time in 1900. the first shot shows the gate to the mission station from the outside being attacked and broken open by chinese boxer rebels, then there is a cut to the garden of the mission station where the missionary and his family are seated. the boxers rush in and after exchanging fire with the missionary, kill him, and pursue his family into the house. his wife appears on the balcony waving for help, which immediately comes with an armed party of british sailors appearing through the gate to the mission station, this time seen from the inside. they fire at the boxers, and advance out of the frame into the next shot, which is taken from the opposite direction looking towards the house. this constitutes the first "reverse angle" cut in film history. the scene continues with the sailors rescuing the remaining members of the missionary's family. g.a. smith further developed the ideas of breaking a scene shot in one place into a series of shots taken from different camera positions over the next couple of years, starting with the little doctors of 1901. in this film a little girl is administering pretend medicine to a kitten, and smith cuts in to a big close up of the kitten as she does so, and then cuts back to the main shot. in this case the inserted close up is not shown as a point of view shot in a circular mask. he summed up his work in mary jane's mishap of 1903, with repeated cuts in to a close shot of a housemaid fooling around, along with superimpositions and other devices, before abandoning film-making to invent the kinemacolor system of colour cinematography. james williamson concentrated on making films taking action from one place shown in one shot to the next shown in another shot in films like stop thief! and fire!, made in 1901, and many others. ====film continuity developed==== other film-makers then took up all these ideas, which is the basis of film construction, or "film language", or "film grammar", as we know it. the best known of these film-makers was edwin s. porter, who started making films for the edison company in 1901. when he began making longer films in 1902, he put a dissolve between every shot, just as georges méliès was already doing, and he frequently had the same action repeated across the dissolves. in other words, edwin porter did not develop the basics of film construction. the pathé company in france also made imitations and variations of smith and williamson's films from 1902 onwards using cuts between the shots, which helped to standardize the basics of film construction. in 1903 there was a substantial increase in the number of women film several minutes long unclear, as a result of the great popularity of georges méliès’ le voyage dans la lune (a trip to the moon), which came out in early 1902, though such films were still a very minor part of production. most of them were what came to be called "chase films". these were inspired by james williamson's stop thief! of 1901, which showed a tramp stealing a leg of mutton from a butcher's boy in the first shot, then being chased through the second shot by the butcher's boy and assorted dogs, and finally being caught by the dogs in the third shot. several british films made in the first half of 1903 extended the chase method of film construction. these included an elopement à la mode and the pickpocket: a chase through london, made by alf collins for the british branch of the french gaumont company, daring daylight burglary, made by frank mottershaw at the sheffield photographic company, and desperate poaching affray, made by the haggar family, whose main business was exhibiting films made by others in their traveling tent theatre. all of these films, and indeed others of like nature were shown in the united states, and some them were certainly seen by edwin porter, before he made the great train robbery towards the end of the year. the time continuity in the great train robbery is actually more confusing than that in the films it was modeled on, but nevertheless it was a greater success than them worldwide, because of its wild west violence. from 1900, the pathé company films also frequently copied and varied the ideas of the british film-makers, without making any major innovations in narrative film construction, but eventually the sheer volume of their production led to their film-makers giving a further precision and polish to the details of film continuity. ===1906 to 1914=== poster for a biograph studios release from 1913. 1906 saw the production of an australian film called the story of the kelly gang. the film ran for more than an hour, and was the longest narrative film yet seen in australia, and the world. its approximate reel length was 4,000 feet (1,200 m). ray edmondson and andrew pike (1982) australia's lost films. p.13. national library of australia, canberra. isbn 0-642-99251-7 it was first shown in melbourne, australia on 26 december 1906 and in the uk in january 1908. the argus, 27 december 1906 ina bertrand and ken robb (1982) "the continuing saga of...the story of the kelly gang." cinema papers, no. 36, february 1982, p.18-22 ====the film business==== in 1907 there were about 4,000 small "nickelodeon" cinemas in the united states. the films were shown with the accompaniment of music provided by a pianist, though there could be more musicians. there were also a very few larger cinemas in some of the biggest cities. initially, the majority of films in the programmes were pathé films, but this changed fairly quickly as the american companies cranked up production. the programme was made up of just a few films, and the show lasted around 30 minutes. the reel of film, of maximum length 1000 ft, which usually contained one individual film, became the standard unit of film production and exhibition in this period. the programme was changed twice or more a week, but went up to five changes of programme a week after a couple of years. in general, cinemas were set up in the established entertainment districts of the cities. in other countries of the western world the film exhibition situation was similar. with the change to "nickelodeon" exhibition there was also a change, led by pathé in 1907, from selling films outright to renting them through film exchanges. alt=a film of a re-enactment of a naval battle, depicting russians firing at a japanese ship with a cannon the litigation over patents between all the major american film-making companies had continued, and at the end of 1908 they decided to pool their patents and form a trust to use them to control the american film business. the companies concerned were pathé, edison, biograph, vitagraph, lubin, selig, essanay, kalem, and the kleine optical company, a major importer of european films. the george eastman company, the only manufacturer of film stock in the united states, was also part of the combine, which was called the motion picture patents company (mppc), and eastman kodak agreed to only supply the members with film stock. license fees for distributing and projecting films were extracted from all distributors and exhibitors. the producing companies that were part of the trust were allocated production quotas (two reels, i.e. films, a week for the biggest ones, one reel a week for the smaller), which were supposed to be enough to fill the programmes of the licensed exhibitors. vitagraph and edison already had multiple production units, and so had no difficulty meeting their quota, but in 1908 biograph lost their one working director. they offered the job of making their films to d. w. griffith, an unimportant actor and playwright, who took up the job, and found he had a gift for it. alone he made all the biograph films from 1908 to 1910. this amounted to 30 minutes of screen time a week. but the market was bigger than the motion picture patents company members could supply. although 6,000 exhibitors signed with the mppc, about 2,000 others did not. a minority of the exchanges (i.e. distributors) stayed outside the mppc, and in 1909 these independent exchanges immediately began to fund new film producing companies. by 1911 there were enough independent and foreign films available to programme all the shows of the independent exhibitors, and in 1912 the independents had nearly half of the market. the mppc had effectively been defeated in its plan to control the whole united states market, and the government anti-trust action, which only now started against the mppc, was not really necessary to defeat it. ====multi-reel films==== it was around 1910 that the actors in american films, who up to this point had been anonymous, began to receive screen credit, and the way to the creation of film stars was opened. the appearance of films longer than one reel also helped this process. such films were extremely rare, and almost entirely restricted to film versions of the life of christ, which had reached three reels in length in the first few years of cinema. they were always shown as a special event in special venues, and supported by live commentary and music. a unique addition to this style of presentation was the story of the kelly gang, made in australia in 1906. this was a four-reel version of the career of this famous (in australia) outlaw, and was incomprehensible without explanation. more multi-reel films were made in europe than in the united states after 1906, because the mppc insisted on working on the basis of one-reel films up until 1912. however, before this, some mppc members got around this restriction by occasionally making longer stories in separate parts, and releasing them in successive weeks, starting with vitagraph's the life of moses in five parts (and five reels) at the end 1909. in other countries this film was shown straight through as one picture, and it inspired the creation of other multi-reel films in europe. pathé-frères set up a new subsidiary company in the united states called eclectic in 1913, and in 1914 this began production of features at the pathé plant in new jersey. the french éclair company was already making films in the united states, and their production of features increased with the transfer of more film-makers when the french industry was shut down at the beginning of world war i. up to 1913, most american film production was still carried out around new york, but because of the monopoly of thomas edison's film patents, many filmmakers had moved to southern california, hoping to escape the litany of lawsuits that the edison company had been bringing to protect its monopoly. once there in southern california, the film industry grew continuously. the move to filming in california had begun when selig, one of the mppc companies, sent a production unit there in 1909. other companies, both independents and members of the mppc, then sent units to work there in the summer to take advantage of the sunshine and scenery. the latter was important for the production of westerns, which now formed a major american film genre. the first cowboy star was g.m. anderson ("broncho billy"), directing his own western dramas for essanay, but in 1911 tom mix brought the kind of costumes and stunt action used in live wild west shows to selig film productions, and became the biggest cowboy star for the next two decades. most of the major companies made films in all the genres, but some had a special interest in certain kinds of films. once selig had taken up production in california, they used the (fairly) wild animals from the zoo that colonel selig had set up there in a series of exotic adventures, with the actors being menaced or saved by the animals. essanay specialized in westerns featuring "broncho billy" anderson, and kalem sent sidney olcott off with a film crew and a troupe of actors to various places in america and abroad to make film stories in the actual places they were supposed to have happened. kalem also pioneered the female action heroine from 1912, with ruth roland playing starring roles in their westerns. minor curiosities were some of the films of solax directed by herbert blaché and his wife alice guy. they left american branch of the gaumont company in 1912 to set up their own independent company. the distinguishing feature of some of their films was a deliberate attempt to use resolutely theatrical-type light comedy playing that was directed towards the audience. this went against the trend towards filmic restraint already visible in what were called "polite" comedies from other film companies. in france, pathé retained its dominant position, followed still by gaumont, and then other new companies that appeared to cater to the film boom. a film company with a different approach was film d'art. this was set up at the beginning of 1908 to make films of a serious artistic nature. their declared programme was to make films using only the best dramatists, artists and actors. the first of these was l’assassinat du duc de guise (the assassination of the duc de guise), a historical subject set in the court of henri iii. this film used leading actors from the comédie-française, and had a special accompanying score written by camille saint-saëns. the other french majors followed suit, and this wave gave rise to the english-language description of films with artistic pretensions aimed at a sophisticated audience as "art films". by 1910, the french film companies were starting to make films as long as two, or even three reels, though most were still one reel long. this trend was followed in italy, denmark, and sweden. although the british industry continued to expand after its brilliant beginning, the new companies that replaced the first innovative film-makers proved unable to preserve their drive and originality. ====new film producing countries==== with the worldwide film boom, yet more countries now joined britain, france, and the united states in serious film production. in italy, production was spread over several centres, with turin being the first and biggest. there, ambrosio was the first company in the field in 1905, and remained the largest in the country through this period. its most substantial rival was cines in rome, which started producing in 1906. the great strength of the italian industry was historical epics, with large casts and massive scenery. as early as 1911, giovanni pastrone's two-reel la caduta di troia (the fall of troy) made a big impression worldwide, and it was followed by even bigger spectacles like quo vadis? (1912), which ran for 90 minutes, and pastrone's cabiria of 1914, which ran for two and a half hours. la caduta di troia (the siege of troy) (1911) italian companies also had a strong line in slapstick comedy, with actors like andré deed, known locally as "cretinetti", and elsewhere as "foolshead" and "gribouille", achieving worldwide fame with his almost surrealistic gags. the most important film-producing country in northern europe up until the first world war was denmark. the nordisk company was set up there in 1906 by ole olsen, a fairground showman, and after a brief period imitating the successes of french and british film-makers, in 1907 he produced 67 films, most directed by viggo larsen, with sensational subjects like den hvide slavinde (the white slave), isbjørnenjagt (polar bear hunt) and løvejagten (the lion hunt). by 1910 new smaller danish companies began joining the business, and besides making more films about the white slave trade, they contributed other new subjects. the most important of these finds was asta nielsen in afgrunden (the abyss), directed by urban gad for kosmorama, this combined the circus, sex, jealousy and murder, all put over with great conviction, and pushed the other danish film-makers further in this direction. by 1912 the danish film companies were multiplying rapidly. the swedish film industry was smaller and slower to get started than the danish industry. here, the important man was charles magnusson, a newsreel cameraman for the svenskabiografteatern cinema chain. he started fiction film production for them in 1909, directing a number of the films himself. production increased in 1912, when the company engaged victor sjöström and mauritz stiller as directors. they started out by imitating the subjects favoured by the danish film industry, but by 1913 they were producing their own strikingly original work, which sold very well. russia began its film industry in 1908 with pathé shooting some fiction subjects there, and then the creation of real russian film companies by aleksandr drankov and aleksandr khanzhonkov. the khanzhonkov company quickly became much the largest russian film company, and remained so until 1918. in germany, oskar messter had been involved in film-making from 1896, but did not make a significant number of films per year till 1910. when the worldwide film boom started, he, and the few other people in the german film business, continued to sell prints of their own films outright, which put them at a disadvantage. it was only when paul davidson, the owner of a chain of cinemas, brought asta nielsen and urban gad to germany from denmark in 1911, and set up a production company, projektions-ag "union" (pagu), for them, that a change-over to renting prints began. messter replied with a series of longer films starring henny porten, but although these did well in the german-speaking world, they were not particularly successful internationally, unlike the asta nielsen films. another of the growing german film producers just before world war i was the german branch of the french éclair company, deutsche éclair. this was expropriated by the german government, and turned into decla when the war started. but altogether, german producers only had a minor part of the german market in 1914. overall, from about 1910, american films had the largest share of the market in all european countries except france, and even in france, the american films had just pushed the local production out of first place on the eve of world war i. so even if the war had not happened, american films may have become dominant worldwide. although the war made things much worse for european producers, the technical qualities of american films made them increasingly attractive to audiences everywhere. ====film technique==== a.e. smith filming the bargain fiend in the vitagraph studios in 1907. arc floodlights hang overhead. with the increased production required by the nickelodeon boom, extra artificial lighting was used more and more in the film studios to supplement diffuse sunlight, and so increase the hours that film could be shot during the day. the main sources used were modified arc lights made for street lighting. these were either hung on battens suspended forward of the actors from the roof, or mounted in groups on floorstands. the addition of a metal reflector round the arc source directed a very broad sweep of light in the desired direction. large mercury vapour tube lights (cooper-hewitts) were also used in racks placed in the same way. arc lights had been used to produce special lighting effects in films like the light from a lamp or firelight before 1906, but this now became more common. low key lighting for sinister effect in the mystery of temple court a strong expressive use of a fire effect occurs in d. w. griffith's a drunkard's reformation (1909). here, the reformed drunkard is happily reunited with his family before the fire in the hearth, in a set-up reproducing that at the beginning of the film in which the fire is out, and the hearth is cold, and the family is destitute. low-key lighting (i.e. lighting in which most of the frame is dark) slowly began to be used for sinister scenes, but not in d. w. griffith films. vitagraph's thriller, the mystery of temple court (1910) has low-key lighting for a scene of murder, and their conscience (1912) shows low-key lighting done solely with artificial light for a scene of terror. nero lit by arc floodlights from below in quo vadis? this sort of lighting was appearing occasionally in european films by 1911, and in some cases was pushed much further. lighting from a low angle was used more strongly in the italian epic film quo vadis? in 1912, and then in the famous cabiria (1914) to reinforce the weird atmosphere in one scene. silhouette effects in location scenes began to appear in 1909 in both the united states and italy; though as things developed, european film-makers made more use of this than the americans did. the most important aspect of this was that such shots involved having the sun light the scene from behind, and this approach was extended by using the reflected sunlight from a white surface below the camera to light up the shadow on the actors faces from the front. this is the one novel technique that d. w. griffith and his cameraman billy bitzer may really have invented. the next step was to transfer this kind of back-lighting onto the lighting of actors on studio sets. up to this point artificial lighting in studio scenes had always been put on from the front or side-front, but in 1912 there began to be a few cases where light was put onto the actors from arc floodlights out of shot behind them and to one side, to give a kind of backlighting. it was not until 1915 that the effect of backlighting of the actors by the sun was fully mimicked in studio lighting, by using a powerful arc spotlight shining from above and behind the set down onto the actors. this slowly became a standard component of the studio lighting of figures in american films, but it took much longer to catch on with european cameramen. ====animation develops==== the technique of single frame animation was further developed in 1907 by edwin s. porter in the teddy bears and by j. stuart blackton with work made easy. in the first of these the toy bears were made to move, apparently on their own, and in the latter film building tools were made to perform construction tasks without human intervention, by using frame-by-frame animation. the technique got to europe almost immediately, and segundo de chomon and others at pathé took it further, adding clay animation, in which sculptures were deformed from one thing into another thing frame by frame in sculpture moderne (1908), and then pathé made the next step to the animation of silhouette shapes. also in france, émile cohl fully developed drawn animation in a series of films starting with fantasmagorie (1908), in which humans and objects drawn as outline figures went though a series of remarkable interactions and transformations. in the united states the response was from the famous strip cartoon artist winsor mccay, who drew much more realistic animated figures going through smoother, more naturalistic motion in a series of films starting with the film little nemo, made for vitagraph in 1911. in the next few years various others took part in this development of animated cartoons in the united states and elsewhere. ====cross-cutting between parallel actions==== as the film boom got under way, the pathéa film-makers continued to refine the continuity of action from shot to shot in their films. in films like pathéa's le cheval emballé (the runaway horse) (1907), there appeared a new feature, which can be called cross-cutting between parallel actions. in this film, a delivery man is going about his lady's house inside an apartment house while his horse steals a big meal from a bag of oats outside a feed store. the film cuts back and forwards between the two chains of action four times before the delivery man comes out, and the horse runs away with him. more importantly, early next year the pathé production unit down in the south of france in nice made le médecin du chateau (the physician of the castle), in which there are cuts back and forth between criminals threatening a doctor's wife and child, while the doctor himself drives home to rescue them after being warned by telephone. this film also contains a cut in to a closer shot of the doctor as he hears the dreadful news on the telephone, which uses the new idea of getting in closer to the actor to accentuate the emotion. in the united states, vitagraph was also trying cross-cutting for suspense in 1907 and 1908 with the mill girl and get me a stepladder. before d. w. griffith started directing at biograph in may 1908, he had seen the two pathé films just mentioned, and a number of vitagraph films as well. but griffith's first use of cross-cutting in the fatal hour, made in july 1908, has a much stronger suspense story served by this construction than those in the earlier pathé examples. from this point onwards griffith certainly developed the device much further, gradually increasing the number of alternations between two, and later three, sets of parallel scenes, and also their speed. this intensified usage was only slowly taken up by other american film-makers. so although he did not invent the technique of cross-cutting, he did consciously develop it into a powerful method of film construction. it is also important to note that griffith described cross-cutting indiscriminately as the ‘switch-back’ or ‘cut-back’ or ‘flash-back’ technique, and that by the last of these terms he did not mean what we now understand by a ‘flash-back’. the true ‘flash-back’ was also developed in this period, but not at all by d. w. griffith. although d. w. griffith did not invent any new film techniques, he was the best film director working up to 1913, and this was because he made better dramatic and artistic use of the medium than other directors. one aspect of this was the structure he gave his films, with the final scene mirroring the opening scene, as in the example of a drunkard's reformation already mentioned above. many other examples of this like the country doctor (1908) can easily be found in his work. but the most important thing griffith did was work out significant and expressive natural gestures in intensive rehearsal periods with his actors, before the film was shot, such as the enraged and jealous husband in the voice of the child (1911) walking around his office chomping on a cigar and puffing clouds of smoke out of it through clenched teeth. griffith's increased use of cross-cutting between parallel actions helped him to get more shots into his films than other directors, but he also had another method for doing this. this was to split a scene that could have been played in room (or other place), into two or more sections that moved backwards and forwards between adjoining rooms or spaces. the result of this was that d. w. griffith's films had at least twice as many shots in them as did those of other american directors. over this period, the other directors speeded up, but so did griffith. at first, the technique of cutting in to a closer shot of an actor in a scene made no contribution to the increase in cutting rate, because it was still very rarely done, despite having been established as a possibility in the previous period. the exception to this was a close shot of an object, which was sometimes used to make clear exactly what a person was doing. it was only towards 1913 that film-makers began to cut into closer shots with any regularity. however, american film-makers did get closer to the actors on the average by shooting the whole scene with the camera closer than previously. the vitagraph company led the way here, by using what they called "the nine-foot line" from 1910 onwards. this meant that the actors played a scene up to a line marked on the ground nine feet from the camera lens, which meant that they were shown cut off at the waist in the image. some, but not all, american film-makers followed their example, calling it the "american foreground", while european film-makers stayed with the "french foreground" established by the pathé about 1907, which only cut the actors off at the shins. this corresponded to the actors playing up to a line put down 4 metres in front of the camera lens. ====point of view shots==== an even more important development was the use of the point of view shot. previously, these had only been used to convey the idea of what someone in the film was seeing through a telescope (or other aperture), and this was indicated by having a black circular mask or vignette within the film frame. the true point of view (pov) shot, in which a shot of someone looking at something is followed by a cut to a shot taken from their position without any mask, took longer to appear. in 1910, in vitagraph's back to nature we see a long shot of people looking down over the rail of a ship taken from below, followed by a shot of the lifeboat they are looking at taken from their position. a pair of reverse angles representing the pov of the people on the ship, and what they see in back to nature (1910). however, the vitagraph film-makers continued to be a little uneasy with the device, as a true pov shot is introduced by an explanatory intertitle, "what they saw in the house across the court" in larry trimble's jean and the waif, made at the end of 1910. but a few months later, trimble made jean rescues, another of the popular series starring the fictional exploits of his border collie, which has point of view shots introduced at an appropriate point without explanation. after this, un-vignetted pov shots began to appear fairly frequently in vitagraph films, and also occasionally in films from other american companies. however, d. w. griffith only used them in a theatrical situation, to show what the audience in a theatre were looking at, as did european film-makers. ====reverse-angle cutting==== close in reverse angle shots of two people in confrontation in the loafer. another important development was in the use of reverse angle shots; that is, continuing a scene with a cut to a shot of the action taken from the opposite direction. there were isolated examples of this very early, and the first of these, williamson's attack on a china mission (1900) has already been mentioned. but in 1908, starting with l'assassinat du duc de guise (the assassination of the duc de guise), there began to be other films in which a scene was shown from another direction by cutting to the opposite side. this effect was imitated occasionally in europe and the united states over the next couple of years, and came to be called a "reverse scene". the next step, in which two actors facing each other are shown in successive close shots from taken opposite directions towards each of them, is first to be seen at the end of 1911 in the loafer, made by arthur mackley for essanay. this is what is called reverse-angle shot|reverse-angle cutting, and it is used constantly in present day film-making. however, it took some years to catch on with other american film-makers, but by 1913, it was starting to occur with greater frequency in the work of a few directors. this happened entirely when they were filming exterior scenes, where there was no problem about shooting past the edge of the studio set. a leading example of this use of close in reverse-angle cutting is his last fight (1913), directed by ralph ince for vitagraph, in which one-third of the cuts are between a shot and the reverse angle. however, this sort of thing never happened in d. w. griffith's films, or in european films. ====symbolism and insert shots==== in this period the word "art" was mentioned more and more in connection with motion pictures, and as a result of the increasing artistic ambitions of film-makers, poems began to be transposed directly into films. d. w. griffith went further than this, by creating the visual equivalent of the poetic or musical refrain in the way of the world (1910), by cutting in shots of church bells at intervals down the length of the film. however, this was an exceptional case, and it is not until 1912 that there were the first signs of the special expressive use of insert shots; that is, shots of objects rather than people. in the italian ambrosio companies film la mala planta (the evil plant), directed by mario caserini, which involves a case of poisoning, there is an insert shot of a snake slithering over the ‘evil plant’. another of the still very rare examples at this date is in griffith's the massacre, which was made at the end of 1912. this includes an insert shot of a candle at a sick man's bedside guttering out to indicate his death. yet another is in the ambrosio company version of gli ultimi giorni di pompei (the last days of pompeii) (1913). this film includes a scene, preceded by the title "the thorns of jealousy", in which a rejected woman overhears the man she loves with another woman, and this is followed by a fade to a shot of a pair of doves, which then dissolves into a shot of a bird of prey. it was in 1914 that d. w. griffith began to bend the use of the insert towards truly dramatically expressive ends, but he had not done this often, and it is really only with his the avenging conscience of 1914 that a new phase in the use of the insert shot starts. in this film the intertitle "the birth of the evil thought" precedes a series of three shots of the protagonist looking at a spider, and ants eating an insect, though at a later point in the film, when he prepares to kill someone, these shots are cut straight in without explanation. as well as the symbolic inserts already mentioned, the avenging conscience also made extensive use of large numbers of big close up shots of clutching hands and tapping feet as a means of emphasizing those parts of the body as indicators of psychological tension. griffith never went so far in this direction again, but his use of the insert shot made its real impression on other american film-makers during the years 1915-1919. ====film art==== a scene in les debuts de max linder au cinematographe (1910) showing a pathé film crew at work. the vast increase in film production after 1906 inevitably brought specialist writers into film-making as part of the increasing sub-division of labour, but even so the film companies still had to buy stories from outsiders to get enough material for their productions. this introduced a greater variety into the types of story used in films. the use of more complex stories derived from literary and stage works of the recent past also contributed to developments in script film construction. the general american tendency was to simplify the plots borrowed from novels and plays so that they could be dealt with in one reel and with the minimum of titling and the maximum of straightforward narrative continuity, but there were exceptions to this. in these cases the information that was difficult to film and lacking in strong dramatic interest was put into narrative titles before each scene, and this was also mostly the custom in european films of the more seriously intended kind. motion pictures were classified into genres by the film industry following the divisions already established in other media, particularly the stage. the main division was into comedy and drama, but these categories were further subdivided. comedy could be either slapstick (usually referred to as "burlesque farce"), or alternatively "polite comedy", which later came to be referred to as "domestic comedy" or "sophisticated comedy". d. w. griffith made a small number of the latter type of film in his first two years at biograph, but had little interest or aptitude for the genre. from 1910 he let frank powell, and then mack sennett direct the biograph comedies. sennett left in 1912 to set up the keystone company, where he could give his enthusiasm for the slapstick comedy style derived from the earlier pathé comedies like le cheval emballé (the runaway horse) full rein. in europe the more restrained type of comedy was developed in substantial quantities in france, with the films of max linder for pathé representing the summit of the genre from 1910 onwards. linder's comedy was set in an upper middle-class milieu, and relied on clever and inventive ways of getting around the embarrassments and obstacles arising in his single-minded pursuit of a goal. quite often a goal of a sexual nature. d. w. griffith had a major influence on the simplification of film stories. after he had been at biograph for a year, griffith started to make some films that had much less story content than any previous one-reel films. in the country doctor, the action is no more than various people, including the doctor, hurrying backwards and forwards between the doctor's house, where his child is sick, and a neighbouring cottage, where another child is also sick. by 1912 and 1913, there are beginning to be many films from many american companies that rely on applying novel decoration to the story, rather than supplying any twists to the drama itself to sustain interest. ====intertitles==== intertitles containing lines of dialogue began to be used consistently from 1908 onwards. in that year, vitagraph's an auto heroine; or, the race for the vitagraph cup and how it was won, contains a couple of dialogue titles, and the same firm's julius caesar includes three lines of dialogue from shakespeare's play quoted in intertitles before the actors speak them, finishing with "this was the noblest roman of them all". from 1909 a small number of american films, and even one or two european ones, came to include a few dialogue titles, or "spoken titles" as they were called at the time. film-makers slowly progressed from putting these dialogue titles before the scene in which they were spoken, to cutting them into the middle of the shot at the point at which they were understood to be actually spoken by the characters. this transition began in 1912. once underway, the trend was aided by the move towards the increasing use of cuts within scenes in american films. in 1913 a substantial proportion of the dialogue titles that were used in american films were cut in at the point when they were spoken. hardly any of the films where this happened were d. w. griffith films, and indeed many of his 1913 films still contain no dialogue titles at all. although some european film-makers picked up the trend towards using dialogue titles, they did not pick up on the move towards cutting them into the scene at the point at which they were actually spoken until a few years later. the introduction of dialogue titles was far from being a trivial matter, for they entirely transformed the nature of film narrative. when dialogue titles came to be always cut into a scene just after a character starts speaking, and then left with a cut to the character just before they finish speaking, then one had something that was effectively the equivalent of a present-day sound film. ===1914 to 1919=== ====the film business==== the years of the first world war were a complex transitional period for the film industry. it was the period when the exhibition of films changed from short programmes of one-reel films to longer shows consisting of a feature film of four reels or longer, though still supported by short films. the exhibition venues also changed from small nickelodeon cinemas to larger cinemas charging higher prices. these higher prices were partly justified by the new film stars who were now being created. in the united states, nearly all the original film companies which formed the motion picture patents company went out of business in this period because of their resistance to the changeover to long feature films. the one exception to this was the vitagraph company, which was already moving over to long films by 1914. the move towards shooting more films on the west coast around los angeles continued during world war i, until the bulk of american production was carried out there. the universal film manufacturing company had been formed in 1912 as an umbrella company for many of the independent producing companies, and continued to grow during the war. other independent companies were grouped under the mutual banner in 1912, and there were also important new entrants, particularly the jesse lasky feature play company, and famous players, which were both formed in 1913 to take advantage of the fact that films could reproduce the real substance of a stage play (plus embellishments), and so the best plays and actors from the legitimate stage could be enticed into films. in fact, the film industry adopted the term "photoplay" for motion pictures at this time. in 1914 the lasky company and famous players were amalgamated into famous players-lasky, with distribution of their films handled by the new paramount pictures corporation. another new major producing company formed during the war years was triangle, with mack sennett, d. w. griffith and thomas ince heading its production units. despite the talents involved, it only lasted from 1915 to 1917, after which its separate producers took their films to paramount for distribution. equally short-lived, but still very important, was the world film company, which recruited most of the french directors, cameramen, and designers who had previously been working at the fort lee, new jersey studios for pathé and éclair. the biggest success of these years was d. w. griffith's the birth of a nation (1915), made for triangle. griffith applied all the ideas for film staging that he had worked out in his biograph films to a bigoted white southerner's epic view of the civil war and its aftermath. despite protests in the northern cities of the united states organized by the national association for the advancement of colored people and others, it took many millions at the box office. stung by the criticism of his film, griffith made a new film he had just finished, the mother and the law, into one of the strands of an even bigger film with an even bigger theme, intolerance (1916). ====european film production==== in france, film production and exhibition closed down as its personnel became part of the general military mobilization of the country at the beginning of the war. although film production began again in 1915, it was on a reduced scale, and the biggest companies gradually retired from production, to concentrate on film distribution and exhibition. hence the cinemas were given over to imported films, particularly american ones. new small companies entered the business, and new young directors arrived to replace those drafted or working in the united states. the most notable of these was abel gance. italian film production held up during the war, with long features already established as the main form. however, there was a disastrous move in subject matter to what were called "diva films". these romantic dramas had the female star (the "diva") suffering from unhappy love, and striking endless anguished art nouveau poses, while surrounded by male admirers and luxury. they were a commercial failure outside italy. in denmark the nordisk company increased its production so much in 1915 and 1916 that it could not sell all its films, which led to a very sharp decline in danish production, and the end of denmark's importance on the world film scene. the nordisk distribution and cinema chain in germany was effectively expropriated by the german government in 1917. the swedish industry did not have this problem, as its production was more in balance with the market, and more importantly, the quality of its films was now superior to those from denmark. the german film industry was seriously weakened by the war, though with the major companies continuing as before. the distribution organization projektions-ag "union" (pagu) acted as an umbrella company backing production by individual producers, and the messter company also made many films. the most important of the new film producers at the time was joe may, who made a series of thrillers and adventure films through the war years, but ernst lubitsch also came into prominence with a series of very successful comedies and dramas. because of the large local market for films in russia, the industry there was not harmed by the war at first, although the isolation of the country led many russian films to develop peculiarly distinctive features. the khanzhonkov company retained its dominance, but the ermoliev company, which had been formed in 1914, became its principal competitor, propelled by the work of its star, ivan mosjoukin, and principal director, yakov protazanov. the bolshevik revolution in october 1917 did not eliminate the privately owned film companies at first, though production was reduced through 1918. it was only in 1919 that the exodus of talent from the country took place, and fiction film production was reduced to practically nothing. ====film studios==== the major change in film production methods in the united states during this period was the change to shooting in "dark" studios. the existing glass-roofed studios were blacked out, and the many new ones being built around los angeles were constructed with solid walls and ceilings. this meant that shooting could continue all day and night, without being limited by the changing sunlight. the general diffuse daylighting in the old studios was completely replaced with floodlights, and the actors were individually lit with floodlights on floorstands. the use of a spotlight from high at the back onto the actors to rimlight them became more frequent, and around 1918 some american cameramen started to use spotlights to light the actors from the front. all this meant that the figures of the actors were modelled more by the lighting, and more separated from the background by the lower light levels now used on the sets. this was a major step towards the standard studio lighting methods of the sound period. at the same time there was the beginning of a move towards using artificial light to light the actors on location, and some of the biggest studios bought electric generator trucks for this purpose. all these developments took years to reach europe ====irising and soft focus==== complex vignette shot in die austernprinzessin (the oyster princess). a very noticeable technical development was the widespread adoption of irising-in and out to begin and end scenes. this is the revelation of a film shot by its appearance inside a small circular vignette mask which gradually gets larger till it expands beyond the frame, and the whole image is in the clear. d. w. griffith, who used it relentlessly, was responsible for the popularization of this device. by 1918 the use of the iris to begin and end sequences was starting to decrease in the united states, though in europe it was just starting to become fashionable. at that date it is quite easy to find american films such as stella maris in which only fades are used. there were other variants of the simple iris as well and in these the mask opening or closing in front of the lens had shapes other than circular. one of the more frequent of these shapes was the opening slit; a vertical central split appears in the totally black frame, and widens till the whole frame is clear, revealing the scene that is about to start. eventually the diagonally opening slit appeared as well, and then there was the diamond-shaped opening iris, as in poor little peppina and alsace (1916), rather than the usual circle. again, all of these variant forms were very infrequently used, and when they did occur in american films it was usually in the introductory stages. by 1918 the edges of ordinary circular irises were becoming very fuzzy when they were used in american films. enclosing the image inside static vignettes or masks of shapes other than circular also began to appear in films during the years 1914-1919, including symbolic shapes such as a cruciform cut-out in the mary pickford film stella maris (marshall neilan, 1918), and maurice elvey in britain put romantic scenes inside a heart-shaped mask in nelson; the story of england's immortal naval hero (1918) and the rocks of valpré (1919). the most elegant variants occur in some films ernst lubitsch made in 1919. in die austernprinzessin (the oyster princess) a triple layer of horizontal rectangles with rounded ends enclose sets of dancing feet at the frenzied peak of a foxtrot, and in die puppe (the doll) a dozen gossiping mouths are each enclosed in individual small circular vignettes arranged in a matrix. a new idea taken over from still photography was "soft focus". this began in 1915, with some shots being intentionally thrown out of focus for expressive effect, as in mary pickford's fanchon the cricket. the idea developed slowly through the war years, until in d. w. griffith's broken blossoms (1918) all the close ups of lillian gish are heavily diffused by the use of layers of fine black cotton mesh placed in front of the lens. heavy lens diffusion was also used on all the other shots carrying forward the romantic and sentimental parts of the story of this film. ====subjective effects==== it was during this period that camera effects intended to convey the subjective feelings of characters in a film really began to be established. these could now be done as point of view (pov) shots, as in sidney drew's the story of the glove (1915), where a wobbly hand-held shot of a door and its keyhole represents the pov of a drunken man. in poor little rich girl (1917) a camera shot tilting sideways (dutch angle) is intended to convey delirium, and by 1918 the idea had got to russia, in baryshnya i khuligan (the lady and the hooligan), where the hooligan's infatuation with the lady is conveyed by his point of view of her splitting into a multiply superimposed image. the use of anamorphic (in the general sense of distorted shape) images first appears in these years with abel gance's la folie du docteur tube (the madness of dr. tube). in this film the effect of a drug administered to a group of people was suggested by shooting the scenes reflected in a distorting mirror of the fair-ground type. later we have till the clouds roll by (victor fleming, 1919), where anamorphosis is used to depict the nightmare effects of indigestion in a comic manner. in fact, like so many film effects that distort the representation of reality, anamorphosis was first used exclusively in comic contexts. ===="poetic cinema" and symbolism==== symbolic effects taken over from conventional literary and artistic tradition continued to make some appearances in films during these years. in d. w. griffith's the avenging conscience (1914), the title "the birth of the evil thought" precedes a series of three shots of the protagonist looking at a spider, and ants eating an insect, though at a later point in the film when he prepares to kill someone these shots are cut straight in without explanation. possibly as a result of griffith's influence, 1915 was a big year for symbolism, allegories, and parables in the american cinema. films following this route invariably included female figures in light, skimpy draperies, and indeed sometimes wearing nothing at all, doing "expressive" dances or striking plastic poses in sylvan settings. titles include lois weber's hypocrites, vitagraph's youth, someone else's purity, and so on. the primrose path starts with a large painting illustrating the concept, which dissolves into a replica of the same scene with actors posed, and then they come to life, as these would soon become popular aspects of film making. this is then amplified by closer detailed live action representations of stations on "the primrose path". an interesting german example from a few years later is robert reinert's opium (1919), which has some notable innovations in the use of insert shots to help convey the sensation of the drug reveries. these are travelling landscape shots taken from a boat going down a river, and they are intentionally shot out of focus, or underexposed, or cut into the film upside down. symbolist art and literature from the turn of the century also had a more general effect on a small number of films made in italy and russia. the supine acceptance of death resulting from passion and forbidden longings was a major feature of this art, and states of delirium dwelt on at length were important as well. the first russian examples were all made by yevgeni bauer for khanzhonkov during the first world war, and include grezy, schastye vechnoi nochi, and posle smerti, all from 1915. these to some extent live up to the promise of the `decadent' aesthetic suggested by their titles; daydreams, happiness of eternal night, and after death. schastye vechnoi nochi includes a visually very striking vision of a medusa-like monster superimposed on a night-time snow scene, and *posle smerti*has a somewhat subtler dream vision of a dead girl, picked out by extra arc lighting, walking through a wind-blown cornfield in the dusk. in italy, another country somewhat isolated filmically by the war, the same kind of realization of the fin-de-siecle decadent symbolist aesthetic can be found, mostly in films associated with the "diva" phenomenon. the most complete example, which also has decor to match, is charles kraus' il gatto nero (the black cat). this last is one of the few films of this kind to use atmospheric insert shots to heighten the mood. the first film explicitly intended by its maker to be a visual analogue of poetry, marcel l'herbier's rose-france (1919), continues further along these same paths. ====insert shots==== insert shot in old wives for new (cecil b. demille, 1918) the use of insert shots, i.e. close-ups of objects other than faces, was established very early, but apart from the special case of inserts of a letter that was being read by one of the characters, they were infrequently used before 1914. it is really only with his *the avenging conscience*of 1914 that a new phase in the use of the insert shot starts. as well as the symbolic inserts already mentioned, the avenging conscience also made extensive use of large numbers of big close up shots of clutching hands and tapping feet as a means of emphasizing those parts of the body as indicators of psychological tension. griffith never went so far in this direction again, but his use of the insert made its real impression on other american film-makers during the years 1914-1919. cecil b. demille was a leading figure in the increased use of the insert, and by 1918 he had reached the point of including about 9 inserts in every 100 shots in the whispering chorus. he also pushed the insert into areas of visual sensuality inaccessible to d. w. griffith, with such images as a close up of a silver-plated revolver nestling in a pile of silken sexy ribbons in a drawer in old wives for new (1918). ====the atmospheric insert==== like many other devices that were more fully developed in europe during the next decade, what could be called the "atmospheric insert shot" made its first appearance in american films during the years before 1919. this kind of shot is one in a scene which neither contains any of the characters in the story, nor is a point of view shot seen by one of them. an early example is in maurice tourneur's the pride of the clan (1917), in which there is a series of shots of waves beating on a rocky shore which are shown when the locale of the story, which is about the harsh lives of fisher folk, is being introduced. simpler and cruder examples from the same year occurs in william s. hart'sthe narrow trail, in which a single shot of the mouth of san francisco bay taken against the light (the golden gate) is preceded by a narrative title explaining its symbolic function in the story. this film also contains a shot of wild hills and valleys cut in as one character comments that the country far from the city is so clean and pure. by 1918 we can find a shot of the sky being used to reflect the mood of one of the characters without specific explanation in the gun woman (frank borzage), but it must be emphasized that these examples are very rare, and did not either then, or within the next several years, constitute regular practice in the american cinema. the tourneur example just mentioned also could stand as part of the beginning of the "montage sequence". maurice elvey's nelson – england's immortal naval hero (1919) has a symbolic sequence dissolving from a picture of kaiser wilhelm ii to a peacock, and then to a battleship. the atmospheric insert began its notable career in european art cinema in marcel l'herbier'srose-france. here amongst the intentionally "poetic" uses of vignettes and filters and literary intertitles, a shot of the empty path once trod by the lovers is used to evoke the past. ====continuity cinema==== the years 1914ndash;1919 in america also saw the consolidation of the forms of what was to become the dominant mode of commercial cinema: "continuity cinema", or "classical cinema". during this period there were other styles that were still important, and these can be considered to lie along a spectrum between the best examples of "continuity cinema" at one extreme, and at the other extreme the "dis-continuity cinema" of d. w. griffith. there are a number of factors involved in the strong and apparent visual discontinuities between successive shots in griffith's films, and the use of cross-cutting between parallel actions is only the most obvious of these. in 1915, cuts within the duration of a scene were still relatively infrequent in his films, and when they do occur they were frequently from long shot or medium long shot (which were the shots he most used) to a big close up of an insert detail, which only occupied a small part of the frame in the previous shot. this in itself introduces a fairly strong visual discontinuity across the cut, but as well as that, the cut-in shot might often have a circular vignette mask if it were a close up of a person, so reinforcing the effect. and sometimes the now-standard griffith iris-out and iris-in might also be left on the inserted shot, even though it had action continuity with the shots on either side of it. as well as all this there was griffith's habit of moving the action into another shot in an adjoining space, and then back again if it was at all possible, which produced a marked change in background, which also made its small contribution to the discontinuity between shots. one of the advanced continuity techniques involves the exact way the movement of actors from a shot in one location to another in a neighbouring location is handled. at best this kind of transition had previously been dealt with by having the directions of travel of the actor in the two shots correspond on the screen, but in a film such as the bank burglar's fate (jack adolfi, 1914), one can see shot transitions in which a cut is made from an actor just leaving the frame, to a shot of him well inside the frame in an adjoining location, which have the positions and directions so well chosen that to the casual eye his movement appears quite continuous, and the real space and time ellipsis between the shots is concealed. other good examples of this technique for eliminating several yards of waste space and a few seconds of waste time can be seen in ralph ince's films, particularly the right girl (1915), and by 1919 it was widely diffused in american films, but not in those made in europe. all this connects with the rise of the use of cutting to different angles within a scene during the years 1914-1919, and in particular to the development of reverse-angle cutting. ====reverse-angle cutting==== cutting to different angles within a scene now became well-established as a technique for dissecting a scene into shots in american films. this approach had appeared a few times in earlier years, but in general cuts to or from a closer shot within a scene were still being made more or less down the lens axis as established in the long shot of the scene in question. the particular form of cutting to different angles within a scene in which the direction changes by more than ninety degrees is called reverse-angle cutting by film-makers. the leading figure in the full development of reverse-angle cutting was ralph ince. films that he made at vitagraph in 1915 such as the right girl and his phantom sweetheart have a large number of reverse-angle cuts in interior, as well as exterior, scenes. other directors were also just starting to take up this style in 1915, for instance william s. hart in bad buck of santa ynez. as for griffith, in birth of a nation there are just eight cuts to reverse-angle shots in the scene in ford's theatre, while elsewhere throughout the two-and-a-half hour length of this film there are only four more true reverse-angle cuts. nevertheless, the griffith style of film-making was still followed in its full idiosyncrasy, with extensive use of side by side spaces and a definite "front" for the camera, in most slapstick comedy. directors of dramatic films who had worked griffith also followed his style fairly closely, and it the standard for films made by his fine arts section of the triangle company. by 1916 there are a number of films in which there are around 15 to 20 true reverse-angle cuts per hundred shot transitions, such as the deserter (scott sidney) and going straight. by the end of the war such films formed an appreciable but minor part of production: e.g. the gun woman (f. borzage, 1918) and jubilo (clarence badger, 1919). all this hardly concerned european cinema, where those few reverse-angle cuts used were mostly between a watcher and what he sees from his point of view, both being filmed in a fairly distant shot. however, after the end of the war some of the brighter young directors such as lubitsch started using a few reverse-angle cuts, mostly in association with point of view cutting. ====the flash-back==== the use of flash-back structures continued to develop in this period, and the usual way of entering and leaving a flash-back was through a dissolve, and this was in fact the principal use at this time for this device. the vitagraph company's the man that might have been (william humphrey, 1914), is even more complex, with a series of reveries and flash-backs that contrast the protagonist's real passage through life with what might have been, if his son had not died. in this film dissolves are used both to enter and leave the flash-backs, and also the wish-dreams, and also for a time-lapse inside a reverie at one point. but fades are also used for these purposes in this and other films of the period, and flashback transitions are also done with irising in other films, and even straight cuts. during world war i the use of flashbacks occurred in films from all the major european film-making countries as well, from italy (tigre reale) to denmark (evangeliemandens liv) to russia (grezy and posle smerti), where it arrived in 1915. as the years moved on a sudden decline in the use of long flash-back sequences set in around 1917, but on the other hand the use of a transition to and from a brief single shot memory scene remained quite common in american films. however, there could still be an even more complex flash-back construction in american films in the case of w. s. van dyke'sthe lady of the dugout (1918). this film has a story that happened long before which is narrated by one character in the framing scene, and initially accompanied by his narrating dialogue in intertitles, though after a while this stops, and the intertitles then convey the dialogue occurring within the flashback. inside this main flashback there develops cross-cutting to another story, happening at the same time, and at first apparently unconnected with it, though the connection eventually appears. next, inside this first flashback, the lady of the title narrates another story, presented in flashback form, but with cutaways inside it back to events occurring in the time frame in which she is doing her narrating. actually, all this is fairly easy to follow while watching the film, in part because what happens in all these strings of action is relatively simple. ====cross-cutting between parallel actions==== after 1914 cross cutting between parallel actions came to be used whenever appropriate in american films, though this was not the case in european films. it should be noted that a good deal of the american use of cross-cutting was not the rapid alternation between parallel chains of action developed by d. w. griffith, but a limited number of alternations to make it possible to leave out uninteresting bits of action with no real plot function. in europe, some of the most enterprising directors did use cross-cutting sometimes, but they never attained the speed of the many american examples of this technique. cross-cutting was also used to get new effects of contrast, such as the cross-cut sequence in cecil b. demille's the whispering chorus, in which a supposedly dead husband is having a liaison with a chinese prostitute in an opium den, while simultaneously his unknowing wife is being remarried in church. all this was simple compared to d. w. griffith's intolerance (1916), in which four parallel stories are intercut throughout the whole length of the film, though in this case the stories are more similar than contrasting in their nature. the use of cross-cutting within these parallel stories as well as between them produced a complexity that was beyond the comprehension of the average audience of the time. the influence of intolerance produced a few other films that combined a number of similar stories having similar themes, such as maurice tourneur's woman (1918), but the box-office failure of intolerance ensured that these later films had simpler structures. ====the development of film art==== the general trend in the development of cinema, led from the united states, was towards using the newly developed specifically filmic devices for expression of the narrative content of film stories, and combining this with the standard dramatic structures already in use in commercial theatre. d. w. griffith had the highest standing amongst american directors in the industry, because of the dramatic excitement he conveyed to the audience through his films. but there were others who were also considered as major figures at the time. the first of these was cecil b. demille, whose films, such as the cheat (1915), brought out the moral dilemmas facing their characters in a more subtle way than griffith. demille was also in closer touch with the reality of contemporary american life. maurice tourneur was also highly ranked for the pictorial beauties of his films, together with the subtlety of his handling of fantasy, while at the same time he was capable of getting greater naturalism from his actors at appropriate moments, as in a girl's folly (1917). sidney drew was the leader in developing "polite comedy", while slapstick was refined by fatty arbuckle and charles chaplin, who both started with mack sennet's keystone company. they reduced the usual frenetic pace of sennett's films to give the audience a chance to appreciate the subtlety and finesse of their movement, and the cleverness of their gags. by 1917 chaplin was also introducing more dramatic plot into his films, and mixing the comedy with sentiment. in russia, yevgeni bauer put a slow intensity of acting combined with symbolist overtones onto film in a unique way. in sweden, victor sjöström made a series of films that combined the realities of people's lives with their surroundings in a striking manner, while mauritz stiller developed sophisticated comedy to a new level. in germany, ernst lubitsch got his inspiration from the stage work of max reinhardt, both in bourgeois comedy and in spectacle, and applied this to his films, culminating in his die puppe (the doll), die austernprinzessin (the oyster princess) and madame dubarry. ===hollywood triumphant=== until this point, the cinemas of france and italy had been the most globally popular and powerful. but the united states was already gaining quickly when world war i (1914–1918) caused a devastating interruption in the european film industries. the american industry, or "hollywood", as it was becoming known after its new geographical center in california, gained the position it has held, more or less, ever since: film factory for the world, exporting its product to most countries on earth and controlling the market in many of them. by the 1920s, the u.s. reached what is still its era of greatest-ever output, producing an average of 800 feature films annually, film history of the 1920s or 82% of the global total (eyman, 1997). the comedies of charlie chaplin and buster keaton, the swashbuckling adventures of douglas fairbanks and the romances of clara bow, to cite just a few examples, made these performers’ faces well-known on every continent. the western visual norm that would become classical continuity editing was developed and exported – although its adoption was slower in some non-western countries without strong realist traditions in art and drama, such as japan. this development was contemporary with the growth of the studio system and its greatest publicity method, the star system, which characterized american film for decades to come and provided models for other film industries. the studios’ efficient, top-down control over all stages of their product enabled a new and ever-growing level of lavish production and technical sophistication. at the same time, the system's commercial regimentation and focus on glamorous escapism discouraged daring and ambition beyond a certain degree, a prime example being the brief but still legendary directing career of the iconoclastic erich von stroheim in the late teens and the ‘20s. ==the sound era== experimentation with sound film technology, both for recording and playback, was virtually constant throughout the silent era, but the twin problems of accurate synchronization and sufficient amplification had been difficult to overcome (eyman, 1997). in 1926, hollywood studio warner bros. introduced the "vitaphone" system, producing short films of live entertainment acts and public figures and adding recorded sound effects and orchestral scores to some of its major features. during late 1927, warners released the jazz singer, which was mostly silent but contained what is generally regarded as the first synchronized dialogue (and singing) in a feature film; but this process was actually accomplished first by charles taze russell in 1914 with the lengthy film the photo-drama of creation. this drama consisted of picture slides and moving pictures synchronized with phonograph records of talks and music. the early sound-on-disc processes such as vitaphone were soon superseded by sound-on-film methods like fox movietone, deforest phonofilm, and rca photophone. the trend convinced the largely reluctant industrialists that "talking pictures", or "talkies", were the future. a lot of attempts were made before the success of the jazz singer, that can be seen in the list of film sound systems. ===industry impact of sound=== the change was remarkably swift. by the end of 1929, hollywood was almost all-talkie, with several competing sound systems (soon to be standardized). total changeover was slightly slower in the rest of the world, principally for economic reasons. cultural reasons were also a factor in countries like china and japan, where silents co-existed successfully with sound well into the 1930s, indeed producing what would be some of the most revered classics in those countries, like wu yonggang's the goddess (china, 1934) and yasujirō ozu's i was born, but... (japan, 1932). but even in japan, a figure such as the benshi, the live narrator who was a major part of japanese silent cinema, found his acting career was ending. sound further tightened the grip of major studios in numerous countries: the vast expense of the transition overwhelmed smaller competitors, while the novelty of sound lured vastly larger audiences for those producers that remained. in the case of the u.s., some historians credit sound with saving the hollywood studio system in the face of the great depression (parkinson, 1995). thus began what is now often called "the golden age of hollywood", which refers roughly to the period beginning with the introduction of sound until the late 1940s. the american cinema reached its peak of efficiently manufactured glamour and global appeal during this period. the top actors of the era are now thought of as the classic film stars, such as clark gable, katharine hepburn, humphrey bogart, greta garbo, and the greatest box office draw of the 1930s, child performer shirley temple. ===creative impact of sound=== creatively, however, the rapid transition was a difficult one, and in some ways, film briefly reverted to the conditions of its earliest days. the late '20s were full of static, stagey talkies as artists in front of and behind the camera struggled with the stringent limitations of the early sound equipment and their own uncertainty as to how to utilize the new medium. many stage performers, directors and writers were introduced to cinema as producers sought personnel experienced in dialogue-based storytelling. many major silent filmmakers and actors were unable to adjust and found their careers severely curtailed or even ended. this awkward period was fairly short-lived. 1929 was a watershed year: william wellman with chinatown nights and the man i love, rouben mamoulian with applause, alfred hitchcock with blackmail (britain's first sound feature), were among the directors to bring greater fluidity to talkies and experiment with the expressive use of sound (eyman, 1997). in this, they both benefited from, and pushed further, technical advances in microphones and cameras, and capabilities for editing and post-synchronizing sound (rather than recording all sound directly at the time of filming). sound films emphasized on black history and benefited different genres more so than silents did. most obviously, the musical film was born; the first classic-style hollywood musical was the broadway melody (1929) and the form would find its first major creator in choreographer/director busby berkeley (42nd street, 1933, dames, 1934). in france, avant-garde director rené clair made surreal use of song and dance in comedies like under the roofs of paris (1930) and le million (1931). universal pictures begin releasing gothic horror films like dracula and frankenstein (both 1931). in 1933, rko released merian c. cooper's classic "giant monster" film king kong. the trend thrived best in india, where the influence of the country's traditional song-and-dance drama made the musical the basic form of most sound films (cook, 1990); virtually unnoticed by the western world for decades, this indian popular cinema would nevertheless become the world's most prolific. (see also bollywood.) at this time, american gangster films like little caesar and wellman's the public enemy (both 1931) became popular. dialogue now took precedence over "slapstick" in hollywood comedies: the fast-paced, witty banter of the front page (1931) or it happened one night (1934), the sexual double entrendres of mae west (she done him wrong, 1933) or the often subversively anarchic nonsense talk of the marx brothers (duck soup, 1933). walt disney, who had previously been in the short cartoon business, stepped into feature films with the first english-speaking animated feature snow white and the seven dwarfs; released by rko pictures in 1937. 1939, a major year for american cinema, brought such films as the wizard of oz and gone with the wind. ===the 1940s: the war and post-war years=== the desire for wartime propaganda created a renaissance in the film industry in britain, with realistic war dramas like 49th parallel (1941), went the day well? (1942), the way ahead (1944) and noël coward and david lean's celebrated naval film in which we serve in 1942, which won a special academy award. these existed alongside more flamboyant films like michael powell and emeric pressburger's the life and death of colonel blimp (1943), a canterbury tale (1944) and a matter of life and death (1946), as well as laurence olivier's 1944 film henry v, based on the shakespearean history henry v. the success of snow white and the seven dwarfs allowed disney to make more animated features like pinocchio (1940), fantasia (1940), dumbo (1941) and bambi (1942). the onset of us involvement in world war ii also brought a proliferation of films as both patriotism and propaganda. american propaganda films included desperate journey, mrs. miniver, forever and a day and objective burma. notable american films from the war years include the anti-nazi watch on the rhine (1943), scripted by dashiell hammett; shadow of a doubt (1943), hitchcock's direction of a script by thornton wilder; the george m. cohan biopic, yankee doodle dandy (1942), starring james cagney, and the immensely popular casablanca, with humphrey bogart. bogart would star in 36 films between 1934 and 1942 including john huston's the maltese falcon (1941), one of the first films now considered a classic film noir. in 1941, rko pictures released citizen kane made by orson welles. it is often considered the greatest film of all time. it would set the stage for the modern motion picture, as it revolutionized film story telling. the strictures of wartime also brought an interest in more fantastical subjects. these included britain's gainsborough melodramas (including the man in grey and the wicked lady), and films like here comes mr. jordan, heaven can wait, i married a witch and blithe spirit. val lewton also produced a series of atmospheric and influential small-budget horror films, some of the more famous examples being cat people, isle of the dead and the body snatcher. the decade probably also saw the so-called "women's pictures", such as now, voyager, random harvest and mildred pierce at the peak of their popularity. 1946 saw rko radio releasing it's a wonderful life directed by frank capra. soldiers returning from the war would provide the inspiration for films like the best years of our lives, and many of those in the film industry had served in some capacity during the war. samuel fuller's experiences in world war ii would influence his largely autobiographical films of later decades such as the big red one. the actor's studio was founded in october 1947 by elia kazan, robert lewis, and cheryl crawford, and the same year oskar fischinger filmed motion painting no. 1. in 1943, ossessione was screened in italy, marking the beginning of italian neorealism. major films of this type during the 1940s included bicycle thieves, rome, open city, and la terra trema. in 1952 umberto d was released, usually considered the last film of this type. in the late 1940s, in britain, ealing studios embarked on their series of celebrated comedies, including whisky galore!, passport to pimlico, kind hearts and coronets and the man in the white suit, and carol reed directed his influential thrillers odd man out, the fallen idol and the third man. david lean was also rapidly becoming a force in world cinema with brief encounter and his dickens adaptations great expectations and oliver twist, and michael powell and emeric pressburger would experience the best of their creative partnership with films like black narcissus and the red shoes. ===the 1950s=== a production scene from the 1950 hollywood film julius caesar starring charlton heston. the house un-american activities committee investigated hollywood in the early 1950s. protested by the hollywood ten before the committee, the hearings resulted in the blacklisting of many actors, writers and directors, including chayefsky, charlie chaplin, and dalton trumbo, and many of these fled to europe, especially the united kingdom. the cold war era zeitgeist translated into a type of near-paranoia manifested in themes such as invading armies of evil aliens, (invasion of the body snatchers, the war of the worlds); and communist fifth columnists, (the manchurian candidate). during the immediate post-war years the cinematic industry was also threatened by television, and the increasing popularity of the medium meant that some film theatres would bankrupt and close. the demise of the "studio system" spurred the self-commentary of films like sunset boulevard (1950) and the bad and the beautiful (1952). in 1950, the lettrists avante-gardists caused riots at the cannes film festival, when isidore isou's treatise on slime and eternity was screened. after their criticism of charlie chaplin and split with the movement, the ultra-lettrists continued to cause disruptions when they showed their new hypergraphical techniques. the most notorious film is guy debord's howls for sade of 1952. distressed by the increasing number of closed theatres, studios and companies would find new and innovative ways to bring audiences back. these included attempts to literally widen their appeal with new screen formats. cinemascope, which would remain a 20th century fox distinction until 1967, was announced with 1953's the robe. vistavision, cinerama, and todd-ao boasted a "bigger is better" approach to marketing films to a dwindling us audience. this resulted in the revival of epic films to take advantage of the new big screen formats. some of the most successful examples of these biblical and historical spectaculars include the ten commandments (1956), the vikings (1958), ben-hur (1959), spartacus (1960) and el cid (1961). also during this period a number of other significant films were produced in todd-ao, developed by mike todd shortly before his death, including oklahoma! (1955), around the world in 80 days (1956), south pacific (1958) and cleopatra (1963) plus many more. gimmicks also proliferated to lure in audiences. the fad for 3-d film would last for only two years, 1952–1954, and helped sell house of wax and creature from the black lagoon. producer william castle would tout films featuring "emergo" "percepto", the first of a series of gimmicks that would remain popular marketing tools for castle and others throughout the 1960s. in the u.s., a post-ww2 tendency toward questioning the establishment and societal norms and the early activism of the civil rights movement was reflected in hollywood films such as blackboard jungle (1955), on the waterfront (1954), paddy chayefsky's marty and reginald rose's 12 angry men (1957). disney continued making animated films, notably; cinderella (1950), peter pan (1953), lady and the tramp (1955), and sleeping beauty (1959). he began, however, getting more involved in live action films, producing classics like 20,000 leagues under the sea (1954), and old yeller (1957). television began competing seriously with films projected in theatres, but surprisingly it promoted more filmgoing rather than curtailing it. limelight is probably a unique film in at least one interesting respect. its two leads, charlie chaplin and claire bloom, were in the industry in no less than three different centuries. in the 19th century, chaplin made his theatrical debut at the age of eight, in 1897, in a clog dancing troupe, the eight lancaster lads. in the 21st century, bloom is still enjoying a full and productive career, having appeared in dozens of films and television series produced up to and including 2010. ====golden age of asian cinema==== satyajit ray,indian bengali film director. following the end of world war ii in the 1940s, the following decade, the 1950s, marked a 'golden age' for non-english world cinema, especially for asian cinema. many of the most critically acclaimed asian films of all time were produced during this decade, including yasujirō ozu's tokyo story (1953), satyajit ray's the apu trilogy (1955–1959) and the music room (1958), kenji mizoguchi's ugetsu (1954) and sansho the bailiff (1954), raj kapoor's awaara (1951), mikio naruse's floating clouds (1955), guru dutt's pyaasa (1957) and kaagaz ke phool (1959), and the akira kurosawa films rashomon (1950), ikiru (1952), seven samurai (1954) and throne of blood (1957). during japanese cinema's 'golden age' of the 1950s, successful films included rashomon (1950), seven samurai (1954) and the hidden fortress (1958) by akira kurosawa, as well as yasujirō ozu's tokyo story (1953) and ishirō honda's godzilla (1954). dave kehr, anime, japanese cinema's second golden age, the new york times, january 20, 2002. these films have had a profound influence on world cinema. in particular, kurosawa's seven samurai has been remade several times as western films, such as the magnificent seven (1960) and battle beyond the stars (1980), and has also inspired several bollywood films, such as sholay (1975) and china gate (1998). rashomon was also remade as the outrage (1964), and inspired films with "rashomon effect" storytelling methods, such as andha naal (1954), the usual suspects (1995) and hero (2002). the hidden fortress was also the inspiration behind george lucas' star wars (1977). other famous japanese filmmakers from this period include kenji mizoguchi, mikio naruse, hiroshi inagaki and nagisa oshima. japanese cinema later became one of the main inspirations behind the new hollywood movement of the 1960s to 1980s. during indian cinema's 'golden age' of the 1950s, it was producing 200 films annually, while indian independent films gained greater recognition through international film festivals. one of the most famous was the apu trilogy (1955–1959) from critically acclaimed bengali film director satyajit ray, whose films had a profound influence on world cinema, with directors such as akira kurosawa, martin scorsese, james ivory, abbas kiarostami, elia kazan, françois truffaut, steven spielberg, carlos saura, jean-luc godard, isao takahata, gregory nava, ira sachs, wes anderson and danny boyle being influenced by his cinematic style. according to michael sragow of the atlantic monthly, the "youthful coming-of-age dramas that have flooded art houses since the mid-fifties owe a tremendous debt to the apu trilogy". subrata mitra's cinematographic technique of bounce lighting also originates from the apu trilogy. other famous indian filmmakers from this period include guru dutt, ritwik ghatak, mrinal sen, raj kapoor, bimal roy, k. asif and mehboob khan. the cinema of south korea also experienced a 'golden age' in the 1950s, beginning with director lee kyu-hwan's tremendously successful remake of chunhyang-jon (1955). that year also saw the release of yangsan province by the renowned director, kim ki-young, marking the beginning of his productive career. both the quality and quantity of filmmaking had increased rapidly by the end of the 1950s. south korean films, such as lee byeong-il's 1956 comedy sijibganeun nal (the wedding day), had begun winning international awards. in contrast to the beginning of the 1950s, when only 5 films were made per year, 111 films were produced in south korea in 1959. the 1950s was also a 'golden age' for philippine cinema, with the emergence of more artistic and mature films, and significant improvement in cinematic techniques among filmmakers. the studio system produced frenetic activity in the local film industry as many films were made annually and several local talents started to earn recognition abroad. the premiere philippine directors of the era included gerardo de leon, gregorio fernández, eddie romero, lamberto avellana, and cirio santiago. is the curtain finally falling on the philippine kovie industry?. accessed january 25, 2009. aenet: philippine film history. accessed january 22, 2009. ===1960s=== during the 1960s, the studio system in hollywood declined, because many films were now being made on location in other countries, or using studio facilities abroad, such as pinewood in the uk and cinecittà in rome. "hollywood" films were still largely aimed at family audiences, and it was often the more old-fashioned films that produced the studios' biggest successes. productions like mary poppins (1964), my fair lady (1964) and the sound of music (1965) were among the biggest money-makers of the decade. the growth in independent producers and production companies, and the increase in the power of individual actors also contributed to the decline of traditional hollywood studio production. there was also an increasing awareness of foreign language cinema in america during this period. during the late 1950s and 1960s, the french new wave directors such as françois truffaut and jean-luc godard produced films such as les quatre cents coups, breathless and jules et jim which broke the rules of hollywood cinema's narrative structure /well, they actually broke the rules of the cinéma du papa film-making system, since they didn't make "hollywood films" before the 1950s. cinéma du papa has a lot of similarities with classical hollywood narrative structure but they are not identical/ . as well, audiences were becoming aware of italian films like federico fellini's la dolce vita and the stark dramas of sweden's ingmar bergman. in britain, the "free cinema" of lindsay anderson, tony richardson and others lead to a group of realistic and innovative dramas including saturday night and sunday morning, a kind of loving and this sporting life. other british films such as repulsion, darling, alfie, blowup and georgy girl (all in 1965-1966) helped to reduce prohibitions sex and nudity on screen, while the casual sex and violence of the james bond films, beginning with dr. no in 1962 would render the series popular worldwide. during the 1960s, ousmane sembène produced several french- and wolof-language films and became the 'father' of african cinema. in latin america, the dominance of the "hollywood" model was challenged by many film makers. fernando solanas and octavio gettino called for a politically engaged third cinema in contrast to hollywood and the european auteur cinema. further, the nuclear paranoia of the age, and the threat of an apocalyptic nuclear exchange (like the 1962 close-call with the ussr during the cuban missile crisis) prompted a reaction within the film community as well. films like stanley kubrick's dr. strangelove and fail safe with henry fonda were produced in a hollywood that was once known for its overt patriotism and wartime propaganda. in documentary film the sixties saw the blossoming of direct cinema, an observational style of film making as well as the advent of more overtly partisan films like in the year of the pig about the vietnam war by emile de antonio. by the late 1960s however, hollywood filmmakers were beginning to create more innovative and groundbreaking films that reflected the social revolution taken over much of the western world such as bonnie and clyde (1967), the graduate (1967), 2001: a space odyssey (1968), rosemary's baby (1968), midnight cowboy (1969), easy rider (1969) and the wild bunch (1969). bonnie and clyde is often considered the beginning of the so-called new hollywood. in japanese cinema, academy award winning director akira kurosawa produced yojimbo (1961), which like his previous films also had a profound influence around the world. the influence of this film is most apparent in sergio leone's a fistful of dollars (1964) and walter hill's last man standing (1996). yojimbo was also the origin of the "man with no name" trend. meanwhile in india, the academy award winning bengali director satyajit ray wrote a script for the alien in 1967, based on a bengali science fiction story he himself had written in 1962. the film was intended to be his debut in hollywood but the production was eventually cancelled. nevertheless, the script went on to influence later films such as steven spielberg's e.t. (1982) and rakesh roshan's koi... mil gaya (2003). ===1970s: the 'new hollywood' or post-classical cinema=== the new hollywood was the period following the decline of the studio system during the 1950s and 1960s and the end of the production code, (which was replaced in 1968 by the mpaa film rating system). during the 1970s, filmmakers increasingly depicted explicit sexual content and showed gunfight and battle scenes that included graphic images of bloody deaths - a good example of this is wes craven's the last house on the left (1972). post-classical cinema is the changing methods of storytelling of the new hollywood producers. the new methods of drama and characterization played upon audience expectations acquired during the classical/golden age period: story chronology may be scrambled, storylines may feature unsettling "twist endings", main characters may behave in a morally ambiguous fashion, and the lines between the antagonist and protagonist may be blurred. the beginnings of post-classical storytelling may be seen in 1940s and 1950s film noir films, in films such as rebel without a cause (1955), and in hitchcock's psycho. 1971 marked the release of controversial films like straw dogs, a clockwork orange, the french connection and dirty harry. this sparked heated controversy over the perceived escalation of violence in cinema. during the 1970s, a new group of american filmmakers emerged, such as martin scorsese, francis ford coppola, roman polanski, steven spielberg, george lucas and brian de palma. this coincided with the increasing popularity of the auteur theory in film literature and the media, which posited that a film director's films express their personal vision and creative insights. the development of the auteur style of filmmaking helped to give these directors far greater control over their projects than would have been possible in earlier eras. this led to some great critical and commercial successes, like scorsese's taxi driver, coppola's the godfather films, polanski's chinatown, spielberg's jaws and close encounters of the third kind and george lucas's wars episode iv: a new hope|star wars]. it also, however, resulted in some failures, including peter bogdanovich's at long last love and michael cimino's hugely expensive western epic heaven's gate, which helped to bring about the demise of its backer, united artists. the financial disaster of heaven's gate marking the end of the visionary "auteur" directors of the "new hollywood", who had unrestrained creative and financial freedom to develop films. the phenomenal success in the 1970s of jaws and star wars in particular, led to the rise of the modern "blockbuster". hollywood studios increasingly focused on producing a smaller number of very large budget films with massive marketing and promotional campaigns. this trend had already been foreshadowed by the commercial success of disaster films such as the poseidon adventure and the towering inferno. during the mid-1970s, more pornographic theatres, euphemistically called "adult cinemas", were established, and the legal production of hardcore pornographic films began. porn films such as deep throat and its star linda lovelace became something of a popular culture phenomenon and resulted in a spate of similar sex films. the porn cinemas finally died out during the 1980s, when the popularization of the home vcr and pornography videotapes allowed audiences to watch sex films at home. in the early 1970s, english-language audiences became more aware of the new west german cinema, with werner herzog, rainer werner fassbinder and wim wenders among its leading exponents. in world cinema, the 1970s saw a dramatic increase in the popularity of martial arts films, largely due to its reinvention by bruce lee, who departed from the artistic style of traditional chinese martial arts films and added a much greater sense of realism to them with his jeet kune do style. this began with the big boss (1971), which was a major success across asia. however, he didn't gain fame in the western world until shortly after his death in 1973, when enter the dragon was released. the film went on to become the most successful martial arts film in cinematic history, popularized the martial arts film genre across the world, and cemented bruce lee's status as a cultural icon. hong kong action cinema, however, was in decline due to a wave of "bruceploitation" films. this trend eventually came to an end in 1978 with the martial arts comedy films, snake in the eagle's shadow and drunken master, directed by yuen woo-ping and starring jackie chan, laying the foundations for the rise of hong kong action cinema in the 1980s. while the musical film genre had declined in hollywood by this time, musical films were quickly gaining popularity in the cinema of india, where the term "bollywood" was coined for the growing hindi film industry in bombay (now mumbai) that ended up dominating south asian cinema, overtaking the more critically acclaimed bengali film industry in popularity. hindi filmmakers combined the hollywood musical formula with the conventions of ancient indian theatre to create a new film genre called "masala", which dominated indian cinema throughout the late 20th century. these "masala" films portrayed action, comedy, drama, romance and melodrama all at once, with "filmi" song and dance routines thrown in. this trend began with films directed by manmohan desai and starring amitabh bachchan, who remains one of the most popular film stars in south asia. the most popular indian film of all time was sholay (1975), a "masala" film inspired by a real-life dacoit as well as kurosawa's seven samurai and the spaghetti westerns. the end of the decade saw the first major international marketing of australian cinema, as peter weir's films picnic at hanging rock and the last wave and fred schepisi's the chant of jimmie blacksmith gained critical acclaim. in 1979, australian filmmaker george miller also garnered international attention for his violent, low-budget action film mad max. ===1980s: sequels, blockbusters and videotape=== during the 1980s, audiences began increasingly watching films on their home vcrs. in the early part of that decade, the film studios tried legal action to ban home ownership of vcrs as a violation of copyright, which proved unsuccessful. eventually, the sale and rental of films on home video became a significant "second venue" for exhibition of films, and an additional source of revenue for the film industries. the lucasndash;spielberg combine would dominate "hollywood" cinema for much of the 1980s, and lead to much imitation. two follow-ups to wars episode iv: a new hope|star wars], three to jaws, and three indiana jones films helped to make sequels of successful films more of an expectation than ever before. lucas also launched thx ltd, a division of lucasfilm in 1982, http://web.archive.org/web/20061109131348/http://www.thx.com/mod/company/milestones.html while spielberg enjoyed one of the decade's greatest successes in e.t. the extra-terrestrial the same year. 1982 also saw the release of disney's tron which was one of the first films from a major studio to use computer graphics extensively. american independent cinema struggled more during the decade, although martin scorsese's raging bull (1980), after hours (1985), and the king of comedy (1983) helped to establish him as one of the most critically acclaimed american film makers of the era. also during 1983 scarface was released, was very profitable and resulted in even greater fame for its leading actor al pacino. probably the most successful film commercially was vended during 1989: tim burton's version of bob kane's creation, batman, exceeded box-office records. jack nicholson's portrayal of the demented joker earned him a total of $60,000,000 after figuring in his percentage of the gross. british cinema was given a boost during the early 1980s by the arrival of david puttnam's company goldcrest films. the films chariots of fire, gandhi, the killing fields and a room with a view appealed to a "middlebrow" audience which was increasingly being ignored by the major hollywood studios. while the films of the 1970s had helped to define modern blockbuster motion pictures, the way "hollywood" released its films would now change. films, for the most part, would premiere in a wider number of theatres, although, to this day, some films still premiere using the route of the limited/roadshow release system. against some expectations, the rise of the multiplex cinema did not allow less mainstream films to be shown, but simply allowed the major blockbusters to be given an even greater number of screenings. however, films that had been overlooked in cinemas were increasingly being given a second chance on home video. during the 1980s, japanese cinema experienced a revival, largely due to the success of anime films. at the beginning of the 1980s, space battleship yamato (1973) and mobile suit gundam (1979), both of which were unsuccessful as television series, were remade as films and became hugely successful in japan. in particular, mobile suit gundam sparked the gundam franchise of real robot mecha anime. the success of super dimension fortress macross: do you remember love?|macross: do you remember love?] also sparked a macross franchise of mecha anime. this was also the decade when studio ghibli was founded. the studio produced hayao miyazaki's first fantasy films, nausicaä of the valley of the wind (1984) and castle in the sky (1986), as well as isao takahata's grave of the fireflies (1988), all of which were very successful in japan and received worldwide critical acclaim. original video animation (ova) films also began during this decade; the most influential of these early ova films was noboru ishiguro's cyberpunk film megazone 23 (1985). the most famous anime film of this decade was katsuhiro otomo's cyberpunk film akira (1988), which although initially unsuccessful at japanese theaters, went on to become an international success. hong kong action cinema, which was in a state of decline due to endless bruceploitation films after the death of bruce lee, also experienced a revival in the 1980s, largely due to the reinvention of the action film genre by jackie chan. he had previously combined the comedy film and martial arts film genres successfully in the 1978 films snake in the eagle's shadow and drunken master. the next step he took was in combining this comedy martial arts genre with a new emphasis on elaborate and highly dangerous stunts, reminiscent of the silent film era. the first film in this new style of action cinema was project a (1983), which saw the formation of the jackie chan stunt team as well as the "three brothers" (chan, sammo hung and yuen biao). the film added elaborate, dangerous stunts to the fights and slapstick humor, and became a huge success throughout the far east. as a result, chan continued this trend with martial arts action films containing even more elaborate and dangerous stunts, including wheels on meals (1984), police story (1985), armour of god (1986), project a part ii (1987), police story 2 (1988), and dragons forever (1988). other new trends which began in the 1980s were the "girls with guns" sub-genre, for which michelle yeoh gained fame; and especially the "heroic bloodshed" genre, revolving around triads, largely pioneered by john woo and for which chow yun-fat became famous. these hong kong action trends were later adopted by many hollywood action films in the 1990s and 2000s. ===1990s: new special effects, independent films, and dvds=== cinema admissions in 1995 the early 1990s saw the development of a commercially successful independent cinema in the united states. although cinema was increasingly dominated by special-effects films such as (1991), jurassic park (1993) and titanic (1997), independent films like steven soderbergh's sex, lies, and videotape (1989) and quentin tarantino's reservoir dogs (1992) had significant commercial success both at the cinema and on home video. filmmakers associated with the danish filmmovement dogme 95 introduced a manifesto aimed to purify filmmaking. its first few films gained worldwide critical acclaim, after which the movement slowly faded out. major american studios began to create their own "independent" production companies to finance and produce non-mainstream fare. one of the most successful independents of the 1990s, miramax films, was bought by disney the year before the release of tarantino's runaway hit pulp fiction in 1994. the same year marked the beginning of film and video distribution online. animated films aimed at family audiences also regained their popularity, with disney's beauty and the beast (1991), aladdin (1992), and the lion king (1994). during 1995, the first feature length computer-animated feature, toy story, was produced by pixar animation studios and released by disney. after the success of toy story, computer animation would grow to become the dominant technique for feature length animation, which would allow competing film companies such as dreamworks animation and 20th century fox to effectively compete with disney with successful films of their own. during the late 1990s, another cinematic transition began, from physical film stock to digital cinema technology. meanwhile dvds became the new standard for consumer video, replacing vhs tapes. ===2000s=== the documentary film also rose as a commercial genre for perhaps the first time, with the success of films such as march of the penguins and michael moore's bowling for columbine and fahrenheit 9/11. a new genre was created with martin kunert and eric manes' voices of iraq, when 150 inexpensive dv cameras were distributed across iraq, transforming ordinary people into collaborative filmmakers. the success of gladiator lead to a revival of interest in epic cinema, and moulin rouge! renewed interest in musical cinema. home theatre systems became increasingly sophisticated, as did some of the special edition dvds designed to be shown on them. the lord of the rings trilogy was released on dvd in both the theatrical version and in a special extended version intended only for home cinema audiences. there is a growing problem of digital distribution to be overcome with regards to expiration of copyrights, content security, and enforcing copyright. there is higher compression for films, and moore's law allows for increasingly cheaper technology. more films were also being released simultaneously to imax cinema, the first was in 2002's disney animation treasure planet; and the first live action was in 2003's the matrix revolutions and a re-release of the matrix reloaded. later in the decade, the dark knight was the first major feature film to have been at least partially shot in imax technology. there has been an increasing globalization of cinema during this decade, with foreign-language films gaining popularity in english-speaking markets. examples of such films include crouching tiger, hidden dragon (mandarin), amelie (french), lagaan (hindi-urdu), spirited away (japanese), city of god (portuguese), the passion of the christ (aramaic), apocalypto (mayan), slumdog millionaire (parts in hindi-urdu), and inglourious basterds (multiple european languages). recently there has been a revival in 3d film popularity the first being james cameron's ghosts of the abyss which was released as the first full-length 3-d imax feature filmed with the reality camera system. this camera system used the latest hd video cameras, not film, and was built for cameron by emmy nominated director of photography vince pace, to his specifications. the same camera system was used to film (2003), aliens of the deep imax (2005), and the adventures of sharkboy and lavagirl in 3-d (2005). ===2010s=== after james cameron's 3d film avatar became the highest-grossing film of all time, 3d films have gained increasing popularity with many other films being released in 3d, with the best critical and financial successes being in the field of feature film animation such as dreamworks animation's how to train your dragon and walt disney pictures/pixar's toy story 3. as of 2010, the largest film industries by number of feature films produced are those of india, the united states and china. ====the long tail==== one major new development in the early 21st century is the development of systems that make it much easier for regular people to write, shoot, edit and distribute their own films without the large apparatus of the film industry. this phenomenon and its repercussions are outlined in chris anderson's theory, the long tail. ==the underground== alongside the hollywood tradition, there has also been an "underground film" tradition of small-budget, often self-produced works created outside of the studio system and without the involvement of labor unions. ==see also== *b film *cinema of the world *cinema of west bengal *cinema of bengal *culture history *experimental film *fictional film *film  history *film noir *history of science fiction films *kammerspielfilm *list of color film systems *list of film formats *list of years in film *lists of film topics *newsreel *runaway production *silent film *sound film *women's cinema *l'idéal cinéma - jacques tati in aniche the oldest cinéma- still active -in the world since november 23rd 1905. ==references== ==further reading== *abel, richard. the cine goes to town: french cinema 1896-1914university of california press, 1998. *acker, ally. reel women: pioneers of the cinema, 1896 to the present. london: b.t. batsford, 1991. *barnes, john. the cinema in england: 1894-1901 (5 volumes) university of exeter press, 1997. *basten, fred e. glorious technicolor: the movies' magic rainbow. as barnes  company, 1980. *bowser, eileen. the transformation of cinema 1907-1915 (history of the american cinema, vol. 2) charles scribner's sons, 1990. *cook, david a. a history of narrative film, 2nd edition. new york: w. w. norton, 1990. *cousins, mark. the story of film: a worldwide history, new york: thunder's mouth press, 2006. *king, geoff. new hollywood cinema: an introduction. new york: columbia university press, 2002. *merritt, greg. celluloid mavericks: a history of american independent film. thunder's mouth press, 2001. *nowell-smith, geoffrey, ed. the oxford history of world cinema. oxford university press, 1999. *parkinson, david. history of film. new york: thames  hudson, 1995. isbn 0-500-20277-x *rocchio, vincent f. reel racism. confronting hollywood's construction of afro-american culture. westview press, 2000. *salt, barry. film style and technology: history and analysis 2nd ed. starword, 1992. *salt, barry. moving into pictures starword, 2001. *robin van gils met zijn baardje school 2009. *schrader, paul. "notes on film noir." film comment, 1984. *tsivian, yuri. silent witnesses: russian films 1908-1919 british film institute, 1989. *unterburger, amy l. the st. james women filmmakers encyclopedia: women on the other side of the camera. visible ink press, 1999. *usai, p.c.  codelli, l. (editors) before caligari: german cinema, 1895-1920 edizioni biblioteca dell'immagine, 1990. ==external links== *view inside an ancient film camera *popup warning, possible vanity site* *museum of motion picture history, inc. *history exhibit of filmmaking in florida, presented by the state archives of florida *american cinematographer - january, 1930, the early history of wide films *history of film formats *technicolor history *what is a camera obscura? *film sound history at filmsound.org *an introduction to early cinema *list of early sound films 1894-1929 at silent era website *official web site of film historian/oral historian scott feinberg *reality film *film history by decade *popup warning* *project "westphalian history in the film" *cinema: from 1890 to now *a brief, early history of computer graphics in film *film history @ video-film.info *the tex(t)-mex gallerblog meditations on latina/os in cinema *history of film poster *burns, paul the history of the discovery of cinematography an illustrated chronology *the film experience : an undergraduate course taught by prof. david thorburn in the fall of 2007 at mit *hollywood movies history
feminist film theoryfeminist film theory is theoretical film criticism derived from feminist politics and feminist theory. feminists have many approaches to cinema analysis, regarding the film elements analyzed and their theoretical underpinnings. ==history== the development of feminist film theory was influenced by second wave feminism and the development of women's studies within the academy. feminist scholars began taking cues from the new theories arising from these movements to analyzing film. initial attempts in the united states in the early 1970s were generally based on sociological theory and focused on the function of women characters in particular film narratives or genres and of stereotypes as a reflection of a society's view of women. works such as marjorie rosen’s popcorn venus: women, movies, and the american dream (1973) and molly haskell’s from reverence to rape: the treatment of women in movies (1974) analyze how the women portrayed in film related to the broader historical context, the stereotypes depicted, the extent to which the women were shown as active or passive, and the amount of screen time given to women. erens, patricia. “introduction” issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990. pp. xvi. in contrast, film theoreticians in england began integrating critical theory based perspectives drawn from psychoanalysis, semiotics, and marxism, and eventually these ideas gained hold within the american scholarly community in the later 1970s and 1980s. analysis generally focused on "the production of meaning in a film text, the way a text constructs a viewing subject, and the ways in which the very mechanisms of cinematic production affect the representation of women and reinforce sexism". erens, patricia. "introduction", issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990. pp. xvii. in his article, "from the imaginary signifier: identification, mirror," christian metz argues that viewing film is only possible through scopophilia (pleasure from looking, related to voyeurism), which is best exemplified in silent film. braudy and cohen, film theory and criticism, sixth edition, oxford university press, 2004, page 827 according to cynthia a. freeland in "feminist frameworks for horror films," feminist studies of horror films have focused on psychodynamics where the chief interest is "on viewers' motives and interests in watching horror films". braudy and cohen, film theory and criticism, sixth edition, oxford university press, 2004 more recently, scholars have expanded their work to include analysis of television and digital media. additionally, they have begun to explore notions of difference, engaging in dialogue about the differences among women (part of movement away from essentialism in feminist work more generally), the various methodologies and perspectives contained under the umbrella of feminist film theory, and the multiplicity of methods and intended effects that influence the development of films. scholars are also taking increasingly global perspectives, responding to postcolonialist criticisms of anglo- and eurocentrism in the academy more generally. increased focus has been given to, "disparate feminisms, nationalisms, and media in various locations and across class, racial, and ethnic groups throughout the world". mchugh, kathleen and vivian sobchack. “introduction: recent approaches to film feminisms.” signs 30(1):1205–1207. ==key themes== ===the gaze and the female spectator=== in considering the way that films are put together, many feminist film critics have pointed to the "male gaze" that predominates in classical hollywood filmmaking. budd boetticher summarises the view thus: "what counts is what the heroine provokes, or rather what she represents. she is the one, or rather the love or fear she inspires in the hero, or else the concern he feels for her, who makes him act the way he does. in herself the woman has not the slightest importance." laura mulvey's germinal essay "visual pleasure and narrative cinema" (written in 1973 and published in 1975) expands on this conception of the passive role of women in cinema to argue that film provides visual pleasure through scopophilia, and identification with the on-screen male actor. she asserts: "in their traditional exhibitionist role women are simultaneously looked at and displayed, with their appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact so that they can be said to connote to-be-looked-at-ness," and as a result contends that in film a woman is the "bearer of meaning, not maker of meaning." mulvey argues that lacan's psychoanalytic theory is the key to understanding how film creates such a space for female sexual objectification and exploitation through the combination of the patriarchal order of society, and 'looking' in itself as a pleasurable act of voyeurism, as "the cinema satisfies a primordial wish for pleasurable looking." whilst laura mulvey's paper has a particular place in the feminist film theory, it is also important to note that her ideas regarding ways of watching the cinema (from the voyeuristic element to the feelings of identification) have been very important in terms of defining spectatorship from the psychoanalytical view point. mulvey identifies three "looks" or perspectives that occur in film which serve to sexually objectify women. the first is the perspective of the male character on screen and how he perceives the female character. the second is the perspective of the spectator as they see the female character on screen. the third "look" joins the first two looks together: it is the male audience member's perspective of the male character in the film. this third perspective allows the male audience to take the female character as his own personal sex object because he can relate himself, through looking, to the male character in the film. in the paper, mulvey calls for a destruction of modern film structure as the only way to free women from their sexual objectification in film, arguing for a removal of the voyeurism encoded into film by creating distance between the male spectator and the female character. the only way to do so, mulvey argues, is by destroying the element of voyeurism and "the invisible guest". mulvey also asserts that the dominance that men embody is only so because women exist, as without a woman for comparison, a man and his supremacy as the controller of visual pleasure are insignificant. for mulvey, it is the presence of the female that defines the patriarchal order of society as well as the male psychology of thought. mulvey's argument comes as a product of the time period in which she was writing. "visual pleasure and narrative cinema" was composed during the period of second-wave feminism, which was concerned with achieving equality for women in the workplace, and with exploring the psychological implications of sexual stereotypes. mulvey calls for an eradication of female sexual objectivity in order to align herself with second-wave feminism. she argues that in order for women to be equally represented in the workplace, women must be portrayed as men are: as lacking sexual objectification. mulvey posits in her notes to the criterion collection dvd of michael powell's controversial film peeping tom that the cinema spectator’s own voyeurism is made shockingly obvious and even more shockingly, the spectator identifies with the perverted protagonist. the inference is that she includes female spectators in that, identifying with the male observer rather than the female object of the gaze. b. ruby rich argues that women’s relationships with film is instead dialectical, consciously filtering the images and messages they receive through cinema, and reprocessing them to elicit their own meanings. rich, b. ruby. “in the name of feminist film criticism. issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990, pp. 268–287. coming from a black feminist perspective, bell hooks put forth the notion of the “oppositional gaze,” encouraging black women not to accept stereotypical representations in film, but rather actively critique them. hooks, bell. “the oppositional gaze: black female spectators.” the feminism and visual culture reader. amelia jones, ed. london: routledge, 2003, pp. 94–105. janet bergstrom’s article “enunciation and sexual difference” (1979) uses sigmund freud’s ideas of bisexual responses, arguing that women are capable of identifying with male characters and men with women characters, either successively or simultaneously. erens, patricia. “introduction” issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990. pp. xxi. miriam hanson, in “pleasure, ambivalence, identification: valentino and female spectatorship” (1984) put forth the idea that women are also able to view male characters as erotic objects of desire. in "the master's dollhouse: rear window," tania modleski argues that hitchock's film, rear window, is an example of the power of male gazer and the position of the female as a prisoner of the "master's dollhouse". braudy and cohen, film theory and criticism, sixth edition, oxford university press, 2004, page 861. carol clover, in her popular and influential book "men, women, and chainsaws: gender in the modern horror film" (princeton university press, 1992) argues that young male viewers of the horror genre (young males being the primary demographic) are quite prepared to identify with the female-in-jeopardy, a key component of horror narrative, and to identify on an unexpectedly profound level. clover further argues that the "final girl" in the psychosexual sub-genre of exploitation horror invariably triumphs through her own resourcefulness, and is not by any means a passive, or inevitable, victim. laura mulvey, in response to these and other criticisms, revisited the topic in “afterthoughts on ‘visual pleasure and narrative cinema’ inspired by duel in the sun” (1981). in addressing the heterosexual female spectator, she revised her stance to argue that women can take two possible roles in relation to film: a masochistic identification with the female object of desire that is ultimately self-defeating or a transsexual identification with men as the active viewers of the text. a new version of the gaze was offered in the early 1990s by bracha ettinger, who proposed the notion of the "matrixial gaze". ===realism and counter cinema=== the early work of marjorie rosen and molly haskell on representation of women in film was part of a movement to make depictions of women more realistic both in documentaries and narrative cinema. the growing female presence in the film industry was seen as a positive step toward realizing this goal, by drawing attention to feminist issues and putting forth alternative, more true-to-life views of women. however, these images are still mediated by the same factors as traditional film, such as the “moving camera, composition, editing, lighting, and all varieties of sound.” while acknowledging the value in inserting positive representations of women in film, some critics asserted that real change would only come about from reconsidering the role of film in society, often from a semiotic point of view. erens, patricia. “introduction” issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990. pp. xviii. claire johnston put forth the idea that women’s cinema can function as "counter cinema". through consciousness of the means of production and opposition of sexist ideologies, films made by women have the potential to posit an alternative to traditional hollywood films. johnston, claire. "women’s cinema as counter cinema." sexual stratagems: the world of women in film. patricia erens, ed. new york: horizon press, 1979, pp 133–143. in reaction to this article, many women filmmakers have integrated "alternative forms and experimental techniques" to "encourage audiences to critique the seemingly transparent images on the screen and to question the manipulative techniques of filming and editing". erens, patricia. “introduction” issues in feminist film criticism. patricia erens, ed. bloomington: indiana university press, 1990. pp. xix. ==list of notable feminist film theorists and critics== ==see also== *women's cinema *cinesexuality ==references== ==further reading== * sue thornham (ed.), feminist film theory. a reader, edinburgh university press 1999 * multiple voices in feminist film criticism, edited by diane carson, janice r. welsch, linda dittmar, university of minnesota press 1994 * kjell r. soleim (ed.), fatal women. journal of the center for women's and gender research, bergen univ., vol. 11: 115–128, 1999. * bracha l. ettinger (1999), "matrixial gaze and screen: other than phallic and beyond the late lacan." in: laura doyle (ed.) bodies of resistance. evanston, illinois: northwestern university press, 2001. * beyond the gaze: recent approaches to film feminisms. signs vol. 30, no. 1 (autumn 2004). * griselda pollock, differencing the canon. routledge, london  n.y., 1999. * griselda pollock (ed.), psychoanalysis and the image. oxford: blackwell, 2006. * raberger, ursula: new queer oz: feministische filmtheorie und weibliche homosexualiät in zwei filmen von samantha lang. vdm verlag dr. müller: 2009, 128 p. (german)
formalist film theoryformalist film theory is a theory of film study that is focused on the formal, or technical, elements of a film: i.e., the lighting, scoring, sound and set design, use of color, shot composition, and editing. it is a major theory of film study today. == basic theory == formalism, at its most general, considers the synthesis (or lack of synthesis) of the multiple elements of film production, and the effects, emotional and intellectual, of that synthesis and of the individual elements. for example, take the single element of editing. a formalist might study how standard hollywood "continuity editing" creates a more comforting effect and non-continuity or jump cut editing might become more disconcerting or volatile. or one might consider the synthesis of several elements, such as editing, shot composition, and music. the shoot-out that ends sergio leone's spaghetti western "dollars" trilogy is a notable example of how these elements work together to produce an effect: the shot selection goes from very wide to very close and tense; the length of shots decreases as the sequence progresses towards its end; the music builds. all of these elements, in combination rather than individually, create tension. formalism is unique in that it embraces both ideological and auteurist branches of criticism. in both these cases, the common denominator for formalist criticism is style. == ideological formalism == ideologues focus on how socio-economic pressures create a particular style, and auteurists on how auteurs put their own stamp on the material. formalism is primarily concerned with style and how it communicates ideas, emotions, and themes (rather than, as critics of formalism point out, concentrating on the themes of a work itself). two examples of ideological interpretations that are related to formalism: the classical hollywood cinema has a very distinct style, sometimes called the institutional mode of representation: continuity editing, massive coverage, three-point lighting, "mood" music, dissolves, all designed to make the experience as pleasant as possible. the socio-economic ideological explanation for this is, quite crassly, that hollywood wants to make as much money and appeal to as many ticket-buyers as possible. film noir, which was given its name by nino frank, is marked by lower production values, darker images, underlighting, location shooting, and general nihilism: this is because, we are told, during the war and post-war years filmmakers were generally more pessimistic (as well as filmgoers). also, the german expressionists (including fritz lang, who was not technically an expressionist as popularly believed) emigrated to america and brought their stylized lighting effects (and disillusionment due to the war) to american soil. it can be argued that, by this approach, the style or 'language' of these films is directly affected not by the individuals responsible, but by social, economic, and political pressures, of which the filmmakers themselves may be aware or not. it is this branch of criticism that gives us such categories as the classical hollywood cinema, the american independent movement, the new american independent movement, the new queer cinema, and the french, german, and czech new waves. == formalism in auteur theory == if the ideological approach is concerned with broad movements and the effects of the world around the filmmaker, then the auteur theory is diametrically opposed to it, celebrating the individual, usually in the person of the filmmaker, and how his personal decisions, thoughts, and style manifest themselves in the material. this branch of criticism, begun by françois truffaut and the other young film critics writing for cahiers du cinéma, was created for two reasons. first, it was created to redeem the art of film itself. by arguing that films had auteurs, or authors, truffaut sought to make films (and their directors) at least as important as the more widely-accepted art forms, such as literature, music, and painting. each of these art forms, and the criticism thereof, is primarily concerned with a sole creative force: the author of a novel (not, for example, his editor or type-setter), the composer of a piece of music (though sometimes the performers are given credence, akin to actors in film today), or the painter of a fresco (not his assistants who mix the colours or often do some of the painting themselves). by elevating the director, and not the screenwriter, to the same importance as novelists, composers, or painters, it sought to free the cinema from its popular conception as a bastard art, somewhere between theater and literature. secondly, it sought to redeem many filmmakers who were looked down upon by mainstream film critics. it argued that genre filmmakers and low-budget b-movies were just as important, if not more, than the prestige pictures commonly given more press and legitimacy in france and the united states. according to truffaut's theory, auteurs took material that was beneath their talents—a thriller, a pulpy action film, a romance—and, through their style, put their own personal stamp on it. it is this auteur style that concerns formalism. a perfect example of formalist criticism of auteur style would be the work of alfred hitchcock. hitchcock primarily made thrillers, which, according to the cahiers du cinema crowd, were popular with the public but were dismissed by the critics and the award ceremonies, although hitchcock's rebecca won the oscar for best picture at the 1940 academy awards. though he never won the oscar for directing, he was nominated five times in the category. truffaut and his colleagues argued that hitchcock had a style as distinct as that of flaubert or van gogh: the virtuoso editing, the lyrical camera movements, the droll humour. he also had "hitchcockian" themes: the wrong man falsely accused, violence erupting at the times it was least expected, the cool blonde. now, hitchcock is more or less universally lauded, his films dissected shot-by-shot, his work celebrated as being that of a master. and the study of this style, his variations, and obsessions all fall quite neatly under the umbrella of formalist film theory. == see also == * formalism (art) * russian formalism * medium specificity * actual and hypothetical author intentionalism (in art criticism) * clement greenberg * clive bell * structuralism == references == * bordwell, david, "film art: an introduction"; mcgraw-hill; 7th edition (june, 2003). * braudy, leo, ed., "film theory and criticism: introductory readings"; oxford university press; 6th edition (march, 2004). * gianetti, leo, "understanding movies"; prentice hall; 10th edition (march, 2004)
film theoryfilm theory is an academic discipline that aims to explore the essence of the cinema and provides conceptual frameworks for understanding film's relationship to reality, the other arts, individual viewers, and society at large. film theory is not to be confused with general film criticism, though there can be some crossover between the two disciplines. ==history== french philosopher henri bergson's matter and memory (1896) has been cited as anticipating the development of film theory during the birth of cinema. bergson commented on the need for new ways of thinking about movement, and coined the terms "the movement-image" and "the time-image". however, in his 1906 essay l'illusion cinématographique (in l'évolution créatrice), he rejects film as an exemplification of what he had in mind. nonetheless, decades later, in cinéma i and cinema ii (1983–1985), the philosopher gilles deleuze took matter and memory as the basis of his philosophy of film and revisited bergson's concepts, combining them with the semiotics of charles sanders peirce. early film theory arose in the silent era and was mostly concerned with defining the crucial elements of the medium. it largely evolved from the works of directors like germaine dulac, louis delluc, jean epstein, sergei eisenstein, lev kuleshov, and dziga vertov and film theorists like rudolf arnheim, béla balázs and siegfried kracauer. robert stam, film theory: an introduction", oxford: blackwell publishers, 2000. these individuals emphasized how film differed from reality and how it might be considered a valid art form. in the years after world war ii, the french film critic and theorist andré bazin reacted against this approach to the cinema, arguing that film's essence lay in its ability to mechanically reproduce reality, not in its difference from reality. andré bazin, what is cinema? essays selected and translated by hugh gray, berkeley: university of california press, 1971. in the 1960s and 1970s, film theory took up residence in academia importing concepts from established disciplines like psychoanalysis, gender studies, anthropology, literary theory, semiotics and linguistics. however, not until the late 1980s or early 1990s did film theory per se achieve much prominence in american universities by displacing the prevailing humanistic, auteur theory that had dominated cinema studies and which had been focused on the practical elements of film writing, production, editing and criticism. weddle, david. "lights, camera, action. marxism, semiotics, narratology: film school isn't what it used to be, one father discovers." los angeles times, july 13, 2003; url retrieved 22 jan 2011. american scholar david bordwell has spoken against many prominent developments film theory since the 1970s, i.e., he uses the humorously derogatory term "slab theory" to refer to film studies based on the ideas of saussure, lacan, althusser, and/or barthes. instead, bordwell promotes what he describes as "neoformalism." during the 1990s the digital revolution in image technologies has had an impact on film theory in various ways. there has been a refocus onto celluloid film's ability to capture an "indexical" image of a moment in time by theorists like mary ann doane, philip rosen and laura mulvey who was informed by psychoanalysis. from a psychoanalytical perspective, after the lacanian notion of "the real", slavoj žižek offered new aspects of "the gaze" extensively used in contemporary film analysis. slavoj žižek, welcome to the desert of the real, london: verso, 2000. there has also been a historical revisiting of early cinema screenings, practices and spectatorship modes by writers tom gunning, miriam hansen and yuri tsivian. ==specific theories of film== ==see also== ==references== ==further reading== *dudley andrew, concepts in film theory, oxford, new york: oxford university press, 1984. *francesco casetti, theories of cinema, 1945-1990, austin: university of texas press, 1999. * stanley cavell, the world viewed: reflections on the ontology of film (1971); 2nd enlarged edn. (1979) *bill nichols, representing reality. issues and concepts in documentary, bloomington: indiana university press, 1991. *the oxford guide to film studies, oxford university press, 1998.
film noirtwo silhouetted figures in the big combo (1955). the film's cinematographer was john alton, the creator of many of film noir's stylized images. film noir is a cinematic term used primarily to describe stylish hollywood crime dramas, particularly those that emphasize cynical attitudes and sexual motivations. hollywood's classical film noir period is generally regarded as extending from the early 1940s to the late 1950s. film noir of this era is associated with a low-key black-and-white visual style that has roots in german expressionist cinematography. many of the prototypical stories and much of the attitude of classic noir derive from the hardboiled school of crime fiction that emerged in the united states during the last depression. the term film noir, french for "black film," see, e.g., biesen (2005), p. 1; hirsch (2001), p. 9; lyons (2001), p. 2; silver and ward (1992), p. 1; schatz (1981), p. 112. outside the field of noir scholarship, "dark film" is also offered on occasion; see, e.g., block, bruce a., the visual story: seeing the structure of film, tv, and new media (2001), p. 94; klarer, mario, an introduction to literary studies (1999), p. 59. first applied to hollywood films by french critic nino frank in 1946, was unrecognized by most american film industry professionals of that era. naremore (2008), pp. 4, 15–16, 18, 41; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 4–5, 22, 255. cinema historians and critics defined the category retrospectively. before the notion was widely adopted in the 1970s, many of the classic films noirs were referred to as melodramas. whether film noir qualifies as a distinct genre is a matter of ongoing debate among scholars. film noir encompasses a range of plots: the central figure may be a private eye (the big sleep), a plainclothes policeman (the big heat), an aging boxer (the set-up), a hapless grifter (night and the city), a law-abiding citizen lured into a life of crime (gun crazy), or simply a victim of circumstance (d.o.a.). although film noir was originally associated with american productions, films now so described have been made around the world. many pictures released from the 1960s onward share attributes with film noir of the classical period, and often treat its conventions self-referentially. some refer to such latter-day works as neo-noir. the clichés of film noir have inspired parody since the mid-1940s. ==problems of definition== it was not until february 1973 that the new york times first used the term, describing how the "moods and tensions" in the british private-eye parody pulp came "out of the collective depths of the film noir". greenspun (1973), p. 32. the questions of what defines film noir and what sort of category it is provoke continuing debate. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 3. "we'd be oversimplifying things in calling film noir oneiric, strange, erotic, ambivalent, and cruel": this set of attributes constitutes the first of many attempts to define film noir made by french critics raymond borde and etienne chaumeton in their 1955 book panorama du film noir américain 1941–1953 (a panorama of american film noir), the original and seminal extended treatment of the subject. borde and chaumeton (2002), p. 2. they emphasize that not every film noir embodies all five attributes in equal measure—one might be more dreamlike; another, particularly brutal. borde and chaumeton (2002), pp. 2–3. the authors' caveats and repeated efforts at alternative definition have been echoed in subsequent scholarship: in the more than five decades since, there have been innumerable further attempts at definition, yet in the words of cinema historian mark bould, film noir remains an "elusive phenomenon ... always just out of reach". bould (2005), p. 13. though film noir is often identified with a visual style, unconventional within a hollywood context, that emphasizes low-key lighting and unbalanced compositions, see, e.g, ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 4; bould (2005), p. 12; place and peterson (1974). films commonly identified as noir evidence a variety of visual approaches, including ones that fit comfortably within the hollywood mainstream. see, e.g., naremore (2008), p. 167–68; irwin (2006), p. 210. film noir similarly embraces a variety of genres, from the gangster film to the police procedural to the gothic romance to the social problem picture—any example of which from the 1940s and 1950s, now seen as noir's classical era, was likely to be described as a "melodrama" at the time. neale (2000), p. 166; vernet (1993), p. 2; naremore (2008), pp. 17, 122, 124, 140; bould (2005), p. 19. while many critics refer to film noir as a genre itself, others argue that it can be no such thing. for overview of debate, see, e.g., bould (2005), pp. 13–23; telotte (1989), pp. 9–10. for description of noir as a genre, see, e.g., bould (2005), p. 2; hirsch (2001), pp. 71–72; tuska (1984), p. xxiii. for the opposing viewpoint, see, e.g., neale (2000), p. 164; ottoson (1981), p. 2; schrader (1972); durgnat (1970). while noir is often associated with an urban setting, many classic noirs take place in small towns, suburbia, rural areas, or on the open road; so setting cannot be its genre determinant, as with the western. similarly, while the private eye and the femme fatale are character types conventionally identified with noir, the majority of film noirs feature neither; so there is no character basis for genre designation as with the gangster film. nor does film noir rely on anything as evident as the monstrous or supernatural elements of the horror film, the speculative leaps of the science fiction film, or the song-and-dance routines of the musical. ottoson (1981), pp. 2–3. a more analogous case is that of the screwball comedy, widely accepted by film historians as constituting a "genre": the screwball is defined not by a fundamental attribute, but by a general disposition and a group of elements, some—but rarely and perhaps never all—of which are found in each of the genre's films. see dancyger and rush (2002), p. 68, for a detailed comparison of screwball comedy and film noir. however, because of the diversity of noir (much greater than that of the screwball comedy), certain scholars in the field, such as film historian thomas schatz, treat it as not a genre but a "style". schatz (1981), pp. 111–15. alain silver, the most widely published american critic specializing in film noir studies, refers to film noir as a "cycle" silver (1996), pp. 4, 6 passim. see also bould (2005), pp. 3, 4; hirsch (2001), p. 11. and a "phenomenon", silver (1996), pp. 3, 6 passim. see also place and peterson (1974). even as he argues that it has—like certain genres—a consistent set of visual and thematic codes. silver (1996), pp. 7–10. other critics treat film noir as a "mood", see, e.g., jones (2009). characterize it as a "series", see, e.g., borde and chaumeton (2002), pp. 1–7 passim. or simply address a chosen set of films they regard as belonging to the noir "canon". see, e.g., telotte (1989), pp. 10–11, 15 passim. there is no consensus on the matter. for survey of the lexical variety, see naremore (2008), pp. 9, 311–12 n. 1. ==background== ===cinematic sources=== film noir's aesthetics are deeply influenced by german expressionism, an artistic movement of the 1910s and 1920s that involved theater, photography, painting, sculpture, and architecture, as well as cinema. the opportunities offered by the booming hollywood film industry and, later, the threat of growing nazi power led to the emigration of many important film artists working in germany who had either been directly involved in the expressionist movement or studied with its practitioners. bould (2005), pp. 24–33. directors such as fritz lang, robert siodmak, and michael curtiz brought a dramatically shadowed lighting style and a psychologically expressive approach to visual composition, or mise-en-scène, with them to hollywood, where they would make some of the most famous of classic noirs. lang's magnum opus, m—released in 1931, two years before his departure from germany—is among the first major crime films of the sound era to join a characteristically noirish visual style with a noir-type plot, one in which the protagonist is a criminal (as are his most successful pursuers). ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 9–11. by 1931, curtiz had already been in hollywood for half a decade, making as many as six films a year. movies of his such as 20,000 years in sing sing (1932) and private detective 62 (1933) are among the early hollywood sound films arguably classifiable as noir—scholar marc vernet offers the latter as evidence that dating the initiation of film noir to 1940 or any other year is "arbitrary". vernet (1993), p. 15. giving expressionist-affiliated filmmakers particularly free stylistic rein were universal horror pictures such as dracula (1931), the mummy (1932)—the former photographed and the latter directed by the berlin-trained karl freund—and the black cat (1934), directed by austrian émigré edgar g. ulmer. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 11–13. the universal horror that comes closest to noir, both in story and sensibility, however, is the invisible man (1933), directed by englishman james whale and photographed by american arthur edeson. edeson would subsequently photograph the maltese falcon (1941), widely regarded as the first major film noir of the classic era. davis (2004), p. 194. see also ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 133; ottoson (1981), pp. 110–111. vernet (1993) notes that the sort of techniques now associated with expressionism were evident in the american cinema from the mid-1910s forward (pp. 9–12). the "original" femme fatale, marlene dietrich, in a publicity shot for josef von sternberg's melodrama morocco (1930) the vienna-born but largely american-raised josef von sternberg was directing in hollywood at the same time. films of his such as shanghai express (1932) and the devil is a woman (1935), with their hothouse eroticism and baroque visual style, specifically anticipate central elements of classic noir. the commercial and critical success of sternberg's silent underworld in 1927 was largely responsible for spurring a trend of hollywood gangster films. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 6. popular films in the genre such as little caesar (1931), the public enemy (1931), and scarface (1932) demonstrated that there was an audience for crime dramas with morally reprehensible protagonists. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 6–9; silver and ward (1992), pp. 323–24. an important, and possibly influential, cinematic antecedent to classic noir was 1930s french poetic realism, with its romantic, fatalistic attitude and celebration of doomed heroes. spicer (2007), pp. 26, 28; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 13–15; bould (2005), pp. 33–40. the movement's sensibility is mirrored in the warner bros. drama i am a fugitive from a chain gang (1932), a key forerunner of noir. mcgarry (1980), p. 139. among those films not themselves considered film noirs, perhaps none had a greater effect on the development of the genre than america's own citizen kane (1941), the landmark motion picture directed by orson welles. its visual intricacy and complex, voiceover-driven narrative structure are echoed in dozens of classic film noirs. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 20; schatz (1981), pp. 116–22; ottoson (1981), p. 2. italian neorealism of the 1940s, with its emphasis on quasi-documentary authenticity, was an acknowledged influence on trends that emerged in american noir. the lost weekend (1945), directed by billy wilder, yet another vienna-born, berlin-trained american auteur, tells the story of an alcoholic in a manner evocative of neorealism. biesen (2005), p. 207. it also exemplifies the problem of classification: one of the first american films to be described as a film noir, it has largely disappeared from considerations of the field. naremore (2008), pp. 13–14. director jules dassin of the naked city (1948) pointed to the neorealists as inspiring his use of on-location photography with nonprofessional extras. this semidocumentary approach characterized a substantial number of noirs in the late 1940s and early 1950s. along with neorealism, the style had a homegrown precedent, specifically cited by dassin, in director henry hathaway's the house on 92nd street (1945), which demonstrated the parallel influence of the cinematic newsreel. krutnik, neale, and neve (2008), pp. 147–148; macek and silver (1980), p. 135. ===literary sources=== the october 1934 issue of black mask featured the first appearance of the detective character whom raymond chandler would develop into the famous philip marlowe. widdicombe (2001), pp. 37–39, 59–60, 118–19; the primary literary influence on film noir was the hardboiled school of american detective and crime fiction, led in its early years by such writers as dashiell hammett (whose first novel, red harvest, was published in 1929) and james m. cain (whose the postman always rings twice appeared five years later), and popularized in pulp magazines such as black mask. the classic film noirs the maltese falcon and the glass key (1942) were based on novels by hammett; cain's novels provided the basis for double indemnity (1944), mildred pierce (1945), the postman always rings twice (1946), and slightly scarlet (1956; adapted from love's lovely counterfeit). a decade before the classic era, a story of hammett's was the source for the gangster melodrama city streets (1931), directed by rouben mamoulian and photographed by lee garmes, who worked regularly with sternberg. wedding a style and story both with many noir characteristics, released the month before lang's m, city streets has a claim to being the first major film noir. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 6; macek (1980), pp. 59–60. raymond chandler, who debuted as a novelist with the big sleep in 1939, soon became the most famous author of the hardboiled school. not only were chandler's novels turned into major noirs—murder, my sweet (1944; adapted from farewell, my lovely), the big sleep (1946), and lady in the lake (1947)—he was an important screenwriter in the genre as well, producing the scripts for double indemnity, the blue dahlia (1946), and strangers on a train (1951). where chandler, like hammett, centered most of his novels and stories on the character of the private eye, cain featured less heroic protagonists and focused more on psychological exposition than on crime solving; irwin (2006), pp. 71, 95–96. the cain approach has come to be identified with a subset of the hardboiled genre dubbed "noir fiction". for much of the 1940s, one of the most prolific and successful authors of this often downbeat brand of suspense tale was cornell woolrich (sometimes under the pseudonym george hopley or william irish). no writer's published work provided the basis for more film noirs of the classic period than woolrich's: thirteen in all, including black angel (1946), deadline at dawn (1946), and fear in the night (1947). irwin (2006), pp. 123–24, 129–30. another crucial literary source for film noir was w. r. burnett, whose first novel to be published was little caesar, in 1929. it would be turned into a hit for warner bros. in 1931; the following year, burnett was hired to write dialogue for scarface, while beast of the city was adapted from one of his stories. at least one important reference work identifies the latter as a film noir despite its early date. white (1980), p. 17. burnett's characteristic narrative approach fell somewhere between that of the quintessential hardboiled writers and their noir fiction compatriots—his protagonists were often heroic in their way, a way just happening to be that of the gangster. during the classic era, his work, either as author or screenwriter, was the basis for seven films now widely regarded as film noirs, including three of the most famous: high sierra (1941), this gun for hire (1942), and the asphalt jungle (1950). irwin (2006), pp. 97–98, 188–89. ==classic period== ===overview=== the 1940s and 1950s are generally regarded as the "classic period" of american film noir. while city streets and other pre-wwii crime melodramas such as fury (1936) and you only live once (1937), both directed by fritz lang, are categorized as full-fledged noir in alain silver and elizabeth ward's film noir encyclopedia, other critics tend to describe them as "proto-noir" or in similar terms. silver and ward (1992), p. 333, as well as entries on individual films, pp. 59–60, 109–10, 320–21. for description of city streets as "proto-noir", see turan (2008). for description of fury as "proto-noir", see machura, stefan, and peter robson, law and film (2001), p. 13. for description of you only live once as "pre-noir", see ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 9. the film now most commonly cited as the first "true" film noir is stranger on the third floor (1940), directed by latvian-born, soviet-trained boris ingster. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 19; irwin (2006), p. 210; lyons (2000), p. 36; porfirio (1980), p. 269. hungarian émigré peter lorre—who had starred in lang's m—was top-billed, though he did not play the lead. he would play secondary roles in several other formative american noirs. though modestly budgeted, at the high end of the b movie scale, stranger on the third floor still lost its studio, rko, $56,000, almost a third of its total cost. biesen (2005), p. 33. variety magazine found ingster's work "too studied and when original, lacks the flare to hold attention. it's a film too arty for average audiences, and too humdrum for others." variety (1940). stranger on the third floor was not recognized as the beginning of a trend, let alone a new genre, for many decades. most of the film noirs of the classic period were similarly low- and modestly budgeted features without major stars—b movies either literally or in spirit. in this production context, writers, directors, cinematographers, and other craftsmen were relatively free from typical big-picture constraints. there was more visual experimentation than in hollywood filmmaking as a whole: the expressionism now closely associated with noir and the semidocumentary style that later emerged represent two very different tendencies. narrative structures sometimes involved convoluted flashbacks uncommon in non-noir commercial productions. in terms of content, enforcement of the production code ensured that no film character could literally get away with murder or be seen sharing a bed with anyone but a spouse; within those bounds, however, many films now identified as noir feature plot elements and dialogue that were very risqué for the time. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 4, 19–26, 28–33; hirsch (2001), pp. 1–21; schatz (1981), pp. 111–16. out of the past (1947) features many of the genre's hallmarks: a cynical private detective as the protagonist, a femme fatale, multiple flashbacks with voiceover narration, dramatically shadowed photography, and a fatalistic mood leavened with provocative banter. the film stars noir icons robert mitchum and jane greer. thematically, film noirs were most exceptional for the relative frequency with which they centered on women of questionable virtue—a focus that had become rare in hollywood films after the mid-1930s and the end of the pre-code era. the signal film in this vein was double indemnity, directed by billy wilder; setting the mold was barbara stanwyck's unforgettable femme fatale, phyllis dietrichson—an apparent nod to marlene dietrich, who had built her extraordinary career playing such characters for sternberg. an a-level feature all the way, the film's commercial success and seven oscar nominations made it probably the most influential of the early noirs. see, e.g., naremore (2008), pp. 81, 319 n. 13; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 86–88. a slew of now-renowned noir "bad girls" would follow, such as those played by rita hayworth in gilda (1946), lana turner in the postman always rings twice (1946), ava gardner in the killers (1946), and jane greer in out of the past (1947). the iconic noir counterpart to the femme fatale, the private eye, came to the fore in films such as the maltese falcon (1941), with humphrey bogart as sam spade, and murder, my sweet (1944), with dick powell as philip marlowe. other seminal noir sleuths served larger institutions, such as dana andrews's police detective in laura (1944), edmond o'brien's insurance investigator in the killers, and edward g. robinson's government agent in the stranger (1946). the prevalence of the private eye as a lead character declined in film noir of the 1950s, a period during which several critics describe the form as becoming more focused on extreme psychologies and more exaggerated in general. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 30; hirsch (2001), pp. 12, 202; schrader (1972), pp. 59–61 silver and ursini. a prime example is kiss me deadly (1955); based on a novel by mickey spillane, the best-selling of all the hardboiled authors, here the protagonist is a private eye, mike hammer. as described by paul schrader, "robert aldrich's teasing direction carries noir to its sleaziest and most perversely erotic. hammer overturns the underworld in search of the 'great whatsit' turns out to be—joke of jokes—an exploding atomic bomb." schrader (1972), p. 61. orson welles's baroquely styled touch of evil (1958) is frequently cited as the last noir of the classic period. see, e.g., silver (1996), p. 11; ottoson (1981), pp. 182–183; schrader (1972), p. 61. some scholars believe film noir never really ended, but continued to transform even as the characteristic noir visual style began to seem dated and changing production conditions led hollywood in different directions—in this view, post-1950s films in the noir tradition are seen as part of a continuity with classic noir. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 19–53. a majority of critics, however, regard comparable films made outside the classic era to be something other than genuine film noirs. they regard true film noir as belonging to a temporally and geographically limited cycle or period, treating subsequent films that evoke the classics as fundamentally different due to general shifts in filmmaking style and latter-day awareness of noir as a historical source for allusion. see, e.g., hirsch (2001), pp. 10, 202–7; silver and ward (1992), p. 6 (though they phrase their position more ambiguously on p. 398); ottoson (1981), p. 1. ===directors and the business of noir=== a scene from in a lonely place (1950), directed by nicholas ray and based on a novel by noir fiction writer dorothy b. hughes. two of noir's defining actors, gloria grahame and humphrey bogart, portray star-crossed lovers in the film. while the inceptive noir, stranger on the third floor, was a b picture directed by a virtual unknown, many of the film noirs that have earned enduring fame were a-list productions by name-brand filmmakers. debuting as a director with the maltese falcon (1941), john huston followed with the major noirs key largo (1948) and the asphalt jungle (1950). opinion is divided on the noir status of several of alfred hitchcock's thrillers from the era; at least four qualify by consensus: shadow of a doubt (1943), notorious (1946), strangers on a train (1951), and the wrong man (1956). see, e.g., entries on individual films in ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 34, 190–92; silver and ward (1992), pp. 214–15; 253–54, 269–70, 318–19. otto preminger's success with laura (1944) made his name and helped demonstrate noir's adaptability to a high-gloss 20th century-fox presentation. biesen (2005), p. 162. among hollywood's most celebrated directors of the era, arguably none worked more often in a noir mode than preminger—his other classic noirs include fallen angel (1945), whirlpool (1949), where the sidewalk ends (1950) (all for fox) and angel face (1952). a half-decade after double indemnity and the lost weekend, billy wilder made sunset boulevard (1950) and ace in the hole (1951), noirs that were not so much crime dramas as satires on, respectively, hollywood and the news media. in a lonely place (1950) was nicholas ray's breakthrough; his other noirs include his debut, they live by night (1948), and on dangerous ground (1952), noted for their unusually sympathetic treatment of characters alienated from the social mainstream. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 188, 202–3. orson welles had notorious problems with financing, but his three film noirs were well budgeted: the lady from shanghai (1947) received top-level, "prestige" backing, while both the stranger, his most conventional film, and touch of evil, an unmistakably personal work, were funded at levels lower but still commensurate with headlining releases. for overview of welles's noirs, see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 210–11. for specific production circumstances, see brady, frank, citizen welles: a biography of orson welles (1989), pp. 395–404, 378–81, 496–512. like the stranger, fritz lang's the woman in the window (1945) was a production of the independent international pictures. lang's follow-up, scarlet street (1945), was one of the few classic noirs to be officially censored: filled with erotic innuendo, it was temporarily banned in milwaukee, atlanta, and new york state. bernstein (1995). scarlet street was a semi-independent—cosponsored by universal and lang's own diana productions, of which the film's costar, joan bennett, was the second biggest shareholder. lang, bennett, and her husband, universal veteran and diana production head walter wanger, would make secret beyond the door (1948) in similar fashion. mcgilligan (1997), pp. 314–17. before he was forced abroad for political reasons, director jules dassin made two classic noirs that also straddled the major/independent line: brute force (1947) and the influential documentary-style the naked city were developed by producer mark hellinger, who had an "inside/outside" contract with universal similar to wanger's. schatz (1998), pp. 354–58. years earlier, working at warner bros., hellinger had produced three films for raoul walsh, the proto-noirs they drive by night (1940) and manpower (1941), and high sierra (1941), now regarded as a key work in noir's development. see, e.g., schatz (1981), pp. 103, 112. walsh had no great name recognition during his half-century as a working director, but his noirs white heat (1949) and the enforcer (1951) had a-list stars and are seen as important examples of the cycle. see, e.g., entries on individual films in silver and ward (1992), pp. 97–98, 125–26, 311–12. in addition to the aforementioned, other directors associated with top-of-the-bill hollywood film noirs include edward dmytryk (murder, my sweet , crossfire )—the first important noir director to fall prey to the industry blacklist—as well as henry hathaway (the dark corner , kiss of death ) and john farrow (the big clock , night has a thousand eyes ). as noted above, however, most of the hollywood films now considered classic noirs fall into the broad category of the "b movie". see naremore (2008), pp. 140–55, on "b pictures versus intermediates". some were bs in the most precise sense, produced to run on the bottom of double bills by a low-budget unit of one of the major studios or by one of the smaller, so-called poverty row outfits, from the relatively well-off monogram to shakier ventures such as producers releasing corporation (prc). jacques tourneur had made over thirty hollywood bs (a few now highly regarded, most completely forgotten) before directing the a-level out of the past, described by scholar robert ottoson as "the ne plus ultra of forties film noir". ottoson (1981), p. 132. movies with budgets a step up the ladder, known as "intermediates" within the industry, might be treated as a or b pictures depending on the circumstance—monogram created a new unit, allied artists, in the late 1940s to focus on this sort of production. such films have long colloquially been referred to as b movies. robert wise (born to kill , the set-up ) and anthony mann (t-men , raw deal ) each made a series of impressive intermediates, many of them noirs, before graduating to steady work on big-budget productions. mann did some of his most celebrated work with cinematographer john alton, a specialist in what critic james naremore describes as "hypnotic moments of light-in-darkness". naremore (2008), p. 173. he walked by night (1948), shot by alton and, though credited solely to alfred werker, directed in large part by mann, demonstrates their technical mastery and exemplifies the late 1940s trend of "police procedural" crime dramas. put out, like other mann–alton noirs, by the small eagle-lion company, it was the direct inspiration for the dragnet series, which debuted on radio in 1949 and television in 1951. hayde (2001), pp. 3–4, 15–21, 37. detour (1945) cost $117,000 to make when the biggest hollywood studios spent around $600,000 on the average feature. produced at small prc, however, the film was 30% over budget. erickson (2004), p. 26. several directors associated with noir built now well-respected oeuvres largely at the b-movie/intermediate level. samuel fuller's brutal, visually energetic films such as pickup on south street (1953) and underworld u.s.a. (1961) earned him a unique reputation; his advocates praise him as "primitive" sarris (1985), p. 93. and "barbarous". thomson (1998), p. 269. joseph h. lewis directed noirs as diverse as gun crazy (1950) and the big combo (1955). the former—whose screenplay was written by the blacklisted dalton trumbo, disguised by a front—features a bank holdup sequence shown in an unbroken take over three minutes long that proved widely influential. naremore (2008), pp. 128, 150–51; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 97–99. the latter, shot by john alton, takes the shadow-rich noir style to its outer limits. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 59–60. the most distinctive films of phil karlson (the phenix city story , the brothers rico ) tell stories of vice organized on a monstrous scale. clarens (1980), pp. 245–47. the work of other directors who worked largely at this tier of the industry, such as felix e. feist (the devil thumbs a ride , tomorrow is another day ), is now relatively obscure. edgar g. ulmer spent almost his entire hollywood career working at b studios—once in a while on projects that achieved intermediate status; for the most part, on unmistakable bs. in 1945, while at prc, he directed one of the all-time noir cult classics, detour. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 83–85; ottoson (1981), pp. 60–61. ulmer's other noirs include strange illusion (1945), also for prc; ruthless (1948), for eagle-lion, which had acquired prc the previous year; and murder is my beat (1955), for allied artists. a number of low- and modestly budgeted noirs were made by independent, often actor-owned, companies contracting with one of the larger outfits for distribution. serving as producer, writer, director, and top-billed performer, hugo haas made several such films, including pickup (1951) and the other woman (1954). it was in this way that accomplished noir actress ida lupino established herself as the sole female director in hollywood during the late 1940s and much of the 1950s. she does not appear in the best-known film she directed, the hitch-hiker (1953), developed by her company, the filmakers, with support and distribution by rko. muller (1998), pp. 176–77. it is one of the seven classic film noirs produced largely outside of the major studios that have been chosen for the united states national film registry. of the others, one was a small-studio release: detour. four were independent productions distributed by united artists, the "studio without a studio": gun crazy; kiss me deadly; d.o.a. (1950), directed by rudolph maté; and sweet smell of success (1957), directed by alexander mackendrick. one was an independent distributed by mgm, the industry leader: force of evil (1948), directed by abraham polonsky and starring john garfield, both of whom would be blacklisted in the 1950s. krutnik, neale, and neve (2008), pp. 259–60, 262–63. independent production usually meant restricted circumstances, but not always—sweet smell of success, for instance, despite the original plans of the production team, was clearly not made on the cheap, though like many other cherished a-budget noirs it might be said to have a b-movie soul. see mackendrick (2006), pp. 119–20. perhaps no director better displayed that spirit than the german-born robert siodmak, who had already made a score of films before his 1940 arrival in hollywood. working mostly on a features, he made no fewer than eight films now regarded as classic-era film noirs (a figure matched only by lang and mann). see, e.g., silver and ward (1992), pp. 338–39. ottoson (1981) additionally lists two period pieces directed by siodmak (the suspect and the spiral staircase ) for a total of ten (pp. 173–74, 164–65). silver and ward list nine classic-era film noirs by lang, plus two from the 1930s (pp. 338, 396). ottoson lists eight (excluding beyond a reasonable doubt ), plus the same two from the 1930s (passim). silver and ward list seven by mann (p. 338). ottoson additionally lists reign of terror (aka the black book; 1949), set during the french revolution, for a total of eight (passim). see also ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 241. in addition to the killers, burt lancaster's debut and a hellinger/universal coproduction, siodmak's other important contributions to the genre include 1944's phantom lady (a top-of-the-line b and woolrich adaptation), the ironically titled christmas holiday (1944), and cry of the city (1948). criss cross (1949), with lancaster again the lead, exemplifies how siodmak brought the virtues of the b-movie to the a noir. in addition to the relatively looser constraints on character and message at lower budgets, the nature of b production lent itself to the noir style for directly economic reasons: dim lighting not only saved on electrical costs but helped cloak cheap sets (mist and smoke also served the cause); night shooting was often compelled by hurried production schedules; plots with obscure motivations and intriguingly elliptical transitions were sometimes the consequence of hastily written scripts, of which there was not always enough time or money to shoot every scene. in criss cross, siodmak achieves all these effects with purpose, wrapping them around yvonne de carlo, playing the most understandable of femme fatales, dan duryea, in one of his many charismatic villain roles, and lancaster—already an established star—as an ordinary laborer turned armed robber, doomed by a romantic obsession. clarens (1980), pp. 200–2; walker (1992), pp. 139–45; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 77–79. classic-era film noirs in the national film registry 1940–49 the maltese falcon | shadow of a doubt | laura | double indemnity | mildred pierce | the lost weekend detour | the big sleep | the killers | notorious | out of the past | force of evil | the naked city | white heat 1950–58 gun crazy | d.o.a. | in a lonely place | the asphalt jungle | sunset boulevard the hitch-hiker | the big heat | kiss me deadly | the night of the hunter | sweet smell of success | touch of evil ==outside the united states== some critics regard classic film noir as a cycle exclusive to the united states; alain silver and elizabeth ward, for example, argue, "with the western, film noir shares the distinction of being an indigenous american form ... a wholly american film style." silver and ward (1992), p. 1. others, however, regard noir as an international phenomenon. see palmer (2004), pp. 267–68, for a representative discussion of film noir as an international phenomenon. even before the beginning of the generally accepted classic period, there were films made far from hollywood that can be seen in retrospect as film noirs, for example, the french productions pépé le moko (1937), directed by julien duvivier, and le jour se lève (1939), directed by marcel carné. spicer (2007), pp. 5–6, 26, 28, 59; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 14–15. during the classic period, there were many films produced outside the united states, particularly in france, that share elements of style, theme, and sensibility with american film noirs and may themselves be included in the genre's canon. in certain cases, the interrelationship with hollywood noir is obvious: american-born director jules dassin moved to france in the early 1950s as a result of the hollywood blacklist, and made one of the most famous french film noirs, rififi (1955). other well-known french films often classified as noir include quai des orfèvres (1947) and les diaboliques (1955), both directed by henri-georges clouzot; casque d'or (1952) and touchez pas au grisbi (1954), both directed by jacques becker; and ascenseur pour l'échafaud (1958), directed by louis malle. french director jean-pierre melville is widely recognized for his tragic, minimalist film noirs—bob le flambeur (1955), from the classic period, was followed by le doulos (1962), le deuxième souffle (1966), le samouraï (1967), and le cercle rouge (1970). spicer (2007), pp. 32–39, 43; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 255–61. stray dog (1949), directed and cowritten by akira kurosawa, contains many cinematographic and narrative elements associated with classic american film noir. scholar andrew spicer argues that british film noir evidences a greater debt to french poetic realism than to the expressionistic american mode of noir. spicer (2007), p. 9. examples of british noir from the classic period include brighton rock (1947), directed by john boulting; they made me a fugitive (1947), directed by alberto cavalcanti; the small back room (1948), directed by michael powell and emeric pressburger; the october man (1950), directed by roy ward baker; and cast a dark shadow (1955), directed by lewis gilbert. terence fisher directed several low-budget thrillers in a noir mode for hammer film productions, including the last page (aka man bait; 1952), stolen face (1952), and murder by proxy (aka blackout; 1954). before leaving for france, jules dassin had been obliged by political pressure to shoot his last english-language film of the classic noir period in great britain: night and the city (1950). though it was conceived in the united states and was not only directed by an american but also stars two american actors—richard widmark and gene tierney—it is technically a uk production, financed by 20th century-fox's british subsidiary. the most famous of classic british noirs is director carol reed's the third man (1949), like brighton rock based on a graham greene novel. set in vienna immediately after world war ii, it also stars two american actors, joseph cotten and orson welles, who had appeared together in citizen kane. spicer (2007), pp. 16, 91–94, 96, 100; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 144, 249–55; lyons (2000), p. 74, 81, 114–15. elsewhere, italian director luchino visconti adapted cain's the postman always rings twice as ossessione (1943), regarded both as one of the great noirs and a seminal film in the development of neorealism. spicer (2007), pp. 13, 28, 241; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 264, 266. (this was not even the first screen version of cain's novel, having been preceded by the french le dernier tournant in 1939.) spicer (2007), pp. 19 n. 36, 28. in japan, the celebrated akira kurosawa directed several films recognizable as film noirs, including drunken angel (1948), stray dog (1949), the bad sleep well (1960), and high and low (1963). ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 266–68. among the first major neo-noir films—the term often applied to films that consciously refer back to the classic noir tradition—was the french tirez sur le pianiste (1960), directed by françois truffaut from a novel by one of the gloomiest of american noir fiction writers, david goodis. spicer (2007), p. 241; ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 257. noir crime films and melodramas have been produced in many countries in the post-classic area. some of these are quintessentially self-aware neo-noirs—for example, il conformista (1969; italy), der amerikanische freund (1977; germany), the element of crime (1984; denmark), as tears go by (1988; hong kong), and el aura (2005; argentina). others simply share narrative elements and a version of the hardboiled sensibility associated with classic noir, such as the castle of sand (1974; japan), insomnia (1997; norway), croupier (1998; uk), blind shaft (2003; china), and the square (2008; australia). ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 253, 255, 263–64, 266, 267, 270–74; abbas (1997), p. 34; ==neo-noir and echoes of the classic mode== ===1960s and 1970s=== while it is hard to draw a line between some of the noir films of the early 1960s such as blast of silence (1961) and cape fear (1962) and the noirs of the late 1950s, new trends emerged in the post-classic era. the manchurian candidate (1962), directed by john frankenheimer, shock corridor (1962), directed by samuel fuller, and brainstorm (1965), directed by experienced noir character actor william conrad, all treat the theme of mental dispossession within stylistic and tonal frameworks derived from classic film noir. the fugitive (1963–67) brought classic noir themes and mood to television for an extended run. ursini (1995), pp. 284–86; ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 278. as car thief michel poiccard, aka laszlo kovacs, jean-paul belmondo in à bout de souffle (breathless; 1960). poiccard reveres and styles himself after humphrey bogart's screen persona. here he imitates a characteristic bogart gesture, one of the film's motifs. appel (1974), p. 4. in a different vein, films began to appear that self-consciously acknowledged the conventions of classic film noir as historical archetypes to be revived, rejected, or reimagined. these efforts typify what came to be known as neo-noir. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 41. though several late classic noirs, kiss me deadly in particular, were deeply self-knowing and post-traditional in conception, none tipped its hand so evidently as to be remarked on by american critics at the time. see, e.g., variety (1955). for a latter-day analysis of the film's self-consciousness, see naremore (2008), pp. 151–55. see also kolker (2000), p. 364. the first major film to overtly work this angle was french director jean-luc godard's à bout de souffle (breathless; 1960), which pays its literal respects to bogart and his crime films while brandishing a bold new style for a new day. greene (1999), p. 161. in the united states, arthur penn (mickey one , drawing inspiration from truffaut's tirez sur le pianiste and other french new wave films), john boorman (point blank , similarly caught up, though in the nouvelle vague's deeper waters), and alan j. pakula (klute ) directed films that knowingly related themselves to the original film noirs, inviting audiences in on the game. for mickey one, see kolker (2000), pp. 21–22, 26–30. for point blank, see ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 36, 38, 41, 257. for klute, see ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 114–15. a manifest affiliation with noir traditions—which, by its nature, allows different sorts of commentary on them to be inferred—can also provide the basis for explicit critiques of those traditions. in 1973, director robert altman flipped off noir piety with the long goodbye. based on the novel by raymond chandler, it features one of bogart's most famous characters, but in iconoclastic fashion: philip marlowe, the prototypical hardboiled detective, is replayed as a hapless misfit, almost laughably out of touch with contemporary mores and morality. kolker (2000), pp. 344, 363–73; naremore (2008), pp. 203–5; ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 36, 39, 130–33. where altman's subversion of the film noir mythos was so irreverent as to outrage some contemporary critics, kolker (2000), p. 364; ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 132. around the same time woody allen was paying affectionate, at points idolatrous homage to the classic mode with play it again, sam (1972). the most acclaimed of the neo-noirs of the era was director roman polanski's 1974 chinatown. written by robert towne, it is set in 1930s los angeles, an accustomed noir locale nudged back some few years in a way that makes the pivotal loss of innocence in the story even crueler. where polanski and towne raised noir to a black apogee by turning rearward, director martin scorsese and screenwriter paul schrader brought the noir attitude crashing into the present day with taxi driver (1976), a cackling, bloody-minded gloss on bicentennial america. kolker (2000), pp. 207–44; silver and ward (1992), pp. 282–83; naremore (1998), pp. 34–37, 192. in 1978, walter hill wrote and directed the driver, a chase film as might have been imagined by jean-pierre melville in an especially abstract mood. silver and ward (1992), pp. 398–99. hill was already a central figure in 1970s noir of a more straightforward manner, having written the script for director sam peckinpah's the getaway (1972), adapting a novel by pulp master jim thompson, as well as for two tough private eye films: an original screenplay for hickey  boggs (1972) and an adaptation of a novel by ross macdonald, the leading literary descendant of hammett and chandler, for the drowning pool (1975). some of the strongest 1970s noirs, in fact, were unwinking remakes of the classics, "neo" mostly by default: the heartbreaking thieves like us (1973), directed by altman from the same source as ray's they live by night, and farewell, my lovely (1975), the chandler tale made classically as murder, my sweet, remade here with robert mitchum in his last notable noir role. for thieves like us, see kolker (2000), pp. 358–63. for farewell, my lovely, see kirgo (1980), pp. 101–2. detective series, prevalent on american television during the period, updated the hardboiled tradition in different ways, but the show conjuring the most noir tone was a horror crossover touched with shaggy, long goodbye–style humor: (1974–75), featuring a chicago newspaper reporter investigating strange, usually supernatural occurrences. ursini (1995), p. 287. ===1980s and 1990s=== sharon stone as catherine tramell, archetypal modern femme fatale, in the smash box-office hit basic instinct (1992). her diabolic nature is underscored by an "extra-lurid visual code", as in the notorious interrogation scene. williams (2005), p. 229. the turn of the decade brought scorsese's black-and-white raging bull (cowritten by schrader); an acknowledged masterpiece—the american film institute ranks it as the greatest american film of the 1980s and the fourth greatest of all time—it is also a retreat, telling a story of a boxer's moral self-destruction that recalls in both theme and visual ambience noir dramas such as body and soul (1947) and champion (1949). for afi ranking, see for kinship to classic noir boxing films, see muller (1998), pp. 26–27. from 1981, the popular body heat, written and directed by lawrence kasdan, invokes a different set of classic noir elements, this time in a humid, erotically charged florida setting; its success confirmed the commercial viability of neo-noir, at a time when the major hollywood studios were becoming increasingly risk averse. the live-action/animated who framed roger rabbit is considered film noir in many aspects http://documentaries.about.com/od/terminology/g/film-noir-definition-of-film-noir.htm , in that there is a protagonist detective, an unsolved murder crime which resulted from the cynical attitude of an antagonist, suspense building music, a femme fatale and takes place in the late 1940s. the mainstreaming of neo-noir is evident in such films as black widow (1987), shattered (1991), and final analysis (1992). silver and ward (1992), pp. 400–1, 408. few neo-noirs have made more money or more wittily updated the tradition of the noir double-entendre than basic instinct (1992), directed by paul verhoeven and written by joe eszterhas. see, e.g., grothe, mardy, viva la repartee: clever comebacks and witty retorts from history's great wits  wordsmiths (2005), p. 84. the film also demonstrates how neo-noir's polychrome palette can reproduce many of the expressionistic effects of classic black-and-white noir. poison ivy (1992) makes use of similar devices executed in basic instinct, including a shady, seductive femme-fatale with ulterior motives. among big-budget auteurs, michael mann has worked frequently in a neo-noir mode, with such films as thief (1981) and heat (1995) and the tv series miami vice (1984–89) and crime story (1986–88). mann's output exemplifies a primary strain of neo-noir, in which classic themes and tropes are revisited in a contemporary setting with an up-to-date visual style and rock- or hip hop–based musical soundtrack. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 44, 47, 279–80. like chinatown, its more complex predecessor, curtis hanson's oscar-winning l.a. confidential (1997), based on the james ellroy novel, demonstrates an opposite tendency—the deliberately retro film noir; its tale of corrupt cops and femme fatales is seemingly lifted straight from a film of 1953, the year in which it is set. naremore (2008), p. 275; wager (2005), p. 83; hanson (2008), p. 141. director david fincher followed the immensely successful neo-noir se7en (1995) with a film that developed into a cult favorite after its original, disappointing release: fight club (1999) is a sui generis mix of noir aesthetic, perverse comedy, speculative content, and satiric intent. wager (2005), p. 101–14. working generally with much smaller budgets, brothers joel and ethan coen have created one of the most extensive film oeuvres influenced by classic noir, with films such as blood simple (1984) and fargo (1996), considered by some a supreme work in the neo-noir mode. hirsch (1999), pp. 245–47; maslin (1996). the coens cross noir with other generic lines in the gangster drama miller's crossing (1990)—loosely based on the dashiell hammett novels red harvest and the glass key—and the comedy the big lebowski (1998), a tribute to chandler and an homage to altman's version of the long goodbye. for miller's crossing, see martin (1997), p. 157; naremore (2008), p. 214–15; for the big lebowski, see tyree and walters (2007), pp. 40, 43–44, 48, 51, 65, 111; ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 237. the characteristic work of david lynch combines film noir tropes with scenarios driven by disturbed characters such as the sociopathic criminal played by dennis hopper in blue velvet (1986) and the delusionary protagonist of lost highway (1996). the twin peaks cycle, both tv series (1990–91) and film, peaks: fire walk with me|fire walk with me] (1992), puts a detective plot through a succession of bizarre spasms. david cronenberg also mixes surrealism and noir in naked lunch (1991), inspired by the william s. burroughs novel. perhaps no american neo-noirs better reflect the classic noir a-movie-with-a-b-movie-soul than those of director-writer quentin tarantino; james (2000), pp. xviii–xix. neo-noirs of his such as reservoir dogs (1992) and pulp fiction (1994) display a relentlessly self-reflexive, sometimes tongue-in-cheek sensibility, similar to the work of the new wave directors and the coens. other films from the era readily identifiable as neo-noir (some retro, some more au courant) include director john dahl's kill me again (1989), red rock west (1992), the last seduction (1993), to die for (1995), and a perfect murder (1998); four adaptations of novels by jim thompson—the kill-off (1989), after dark, my sweet (1990), the grifters (1990), and the remake of the getaway (1994); and many more, including adaptations of the work of other major noir fiction writers: the hot spot (1990), from hell hath no fury, by charles williams; miami blues (1990), from the novel by charles willeford; and out of sight (1998), from the novel by elmore leonard. several films by director-writer david mamet involve noir elements: house of games (1987), homicide (1991), the spanish prisoner (1997), and heist (2001). see, e.g., silver and ward (1992), pp. 398, 402, 407, 412. on television, remington steele (1982–87) "steele michael" special feature, remington steele, season 3, disc 3 (beverly hills: 20th century fox home entertainment, 2006), dvd and moonlighting (1985–89) paid homage to classic noir while demonstrating an unusual appreciation of the sense of humor often found in the original cycle. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 279. between 1983 and 1989, mickey spillane's hardboiled private eye mike hammer was played with wry gusto by stacy keach in a series and several stand-alone television films (an unsuccessful revival followed in 1997–98). the british miniseries the singing detective (1986), written by dennis potter, tells the story of a mystery writer named philip marlow; widely considered one of the finest neo-noirs in any medium, some critics rank it among the greatest television productions of all time. creeber, (2007), p. 3. the singing detective is the sole tv production cited in ===2000s=== the coens' referenced the noir tradition again with the man who wasn't there (2001); a black-and-white crime melodrama set in 1949, it features a scene apparently staged to mirror the one from out of the past pictured above. lynch's mulholland drive (2001) continued in his characteristic vein, making the classic noir setting of los angeles the venue for a noir-inflected psychological jigsaw puzzle. british-born director christopher nolan's black-and-white debut, following (1998), was an overt homage to classic noir. during the new century's first decade, he was one of the leading hollywood directors of neo-noir with the acclaimed memento (2000), the remake of insomnia (2002), and his dark-toned superhero films, batman begins (2005) and the dark knight (2008). ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 49, 51, 53, 235. director sean penn's the pledge (2001), though adapted from a very self-reflexive novel by friedrich dürrenmatt, plays noir comparatively straight, to devastating effect. ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 50. screenwriter david ayer updated the classic noir bad-cop tale, typified by shield for murder (1954) and rogue cop (1954), with his scripts for training day (2001) and, adapting a story by james ellroy, dark blue (2002); he later wrote and directed the even darker harsh times (2006). michael mann's collateral (2004) features a performance by tom cruise as an assassin in the lineage of le samouraï. the torments of the machinist (2004), directed by brad anderson, evoke both fight club and memento. in 2005, shane black directed kiss kiss bang bang, basing his screenplay in part on a crime novel by brett halliday, who published his first stories back in the 1920s. the film plays with an awareness not only of classic noir but also of neo-noir reflexivity itself. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 107–109. with ultra-violent films such as sympathy for mr. vengeance (2002) and thirst (2009), park chan-wook of south korea has been the most prominent director outside of the united states to work regularly in a noir mode in the new millennium. the most commercially successful neo-noir of this period has been sin city (2005), directed by robert rodriguez in extravagantly stylized black and white with the odd bit of color. the film is based on a series of comic books created by frank miller (credited as the film's codirector), which are in turn openly indebted to the works of spillane and other pulp mystery authors. naremore (2008), pp. 256, 295–96; ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 52. similarly, graphic novels provide the basis for road to perdition (2002), directed by sam mendes, and a history of violence (2005), directed by david cronenberg; the latter was voted best film of the year in the annual village voice poll. writer-director rian johnson's brick (2005), featuring present-day high schoolers speaking a version of 1930s hardboiled argot, won the special jury prize for originality of vision at the sundance film festival. the television series veronica mars (2004–7) also brought a youth-oriented twist to film noir. examples of this sort of generic crossover have been dubbed teen noir. naremore (2008), p. 299; ===science fiction noir=== harrison ford as detective rick deckard in blade runner (1982). like many classic noirs, the film is set in a version of los angeles where it constantly rains. hunter (1982), p. 197. the steam in the foreground is a familiar noir trope, while the "bluish-smoky exterior" updates the black-and-white mode. kennedy (1982), p. 65. in the post-classic era, the most significant trend in noir crossovers has involved science fiction. in jean-luc godard's alphaville (1965), lemmy caution is the name of the old-school private eye in the city of tomorrow. the groundstar conspiracy (1972) centers on another implacable investigator and an amnesiac named welles. soylent green (1973), the first major american example, portrays a dystopian, near-future world via a self-evidently noir detection plot; starring charlton heston (the lead in touch of evil), it also features classic noir standbys joseph cotten, edward g. robinson, and whit bissell. the film was directed by richard fleischer, who two decades before had directed several strong b noirs, including armored car robbery (1950) and the narrow margin (1952). downs (2002), pp. 171, 173. the cynical and stylish perspective of classic film noir had a formative effect on the cyberpunk genre of science fiction that emerged in the early 1980s; the film most directly influential on cyberpunk was blade runner (1982), directed by ridley scott, which pays evocative homage to the classic noir mode ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 242. (scott would subsequently direct the poignant noir crime melodrama someone to watch over me ). scholar jamaluddin bin aziz has observed how "the shadow of philip marlowe lingers on" in such other "future noir" films as twelve monkeys (1995), dark city (1998), and minority report (2002). aziz (2005), section "future noir and postmodernism: the irony begins". ballinger and graydon note "future noir" synonyms: "'cyber noir' but predominantly 'tech noir'" (p. 242). fincher's feature debut was alien 3 (1992), which evoked the classic noir jail film brute force. cronenberg's crash (1996), an adaptation of the speculative novel by j. g. ballard, has been described as a "film noir in bruise tones". the hero is the target of investigation in gattaca (1997), which fuses film noir motifs with a scenario indebted to brave new world. the thirteenth floor (1999), like blade runner, is an explicit homage to classic noir, in this case involving speculations about virtual reality. science fiction, noir, and anime are brought together in the japanese films ghost in the shell (1995) and (2004), both directed by mamoru oshii. anime television series with science fiction noir themes include cowboy bebop (1998), the big o (1999), and noir (2001). dargis (2004); ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 234; ==parodies== film noir has been parodied many times, in many manners. in 1945, danny kaye starred in what appears to be the first intentional film noir parody, wonder man. silver and ward (1992), p. 332. that same year, deanna durbin was the singing lead in the comedic noir lady on a train, which makes fun of woolrich-brand wistful miserablism. bob hope inaugurated the private-eye noir parody with my favorite brunette (1947), playing a baby photographer who is mistaken for an ironfisted detective. in 1947 as well, the bowery boys appeared in hard boiled mahoney, which had a similar mistaken-identity plot; they spoofed the genre once more in 1953's private eyes (1953). two rko productions starring robert mitchum take film noir over the border into self-parody: the big steal (1949), directed by don siegel, and his kind of woman (1951). the "girl hunt" ballet in vincente minnelli's the band wagon (1953) is a ten-minute distillation of—and play on—noir in dance. richardson (1992), p. 120. the cheap detective (1978), starring peter falk, is a broad spoof of several films, including the bogart classics the maltese falcon and casablanca. carl reiner's black-and-white dead men don't wear plaid (1982) appropriates clips of classic noirs for a farcical pastiche, while his fatal instinct (1993) sends up noirs both classic (double indemnity) and neo (basic instinct). robert zemeckis's who framed roger rabbit? (1988) develops a noir plot set in 1940s l.a. around a host of cartoon characters. "loneliness has followed me my whole life, everywhere. in bars, in cars, sidewalks, stores, everywhere. there's no escape. i'm god's lonely man." robert de niro as neo-noir antihero travis bickle in taxi driver (1976). noir parodies come in darker tones as well. murder by contract (1958), directed by irving lerner, is a deadpan joke on noir, with a denouement as bleak as any of the films it kids. an ultra-low-budget columbia pictures production, it may qualify as the first intentional example of what is now called a neo-noir film; it was likely a source of inspiration for both melville's le samouraï and scorsese's taxi driver. naremore (2008), p. 158. belying its parodic strain, the long goodbyes final act is seriously grave. taxi driver caustically deconstructs the "dark" crime film, taking it to an absurd extreme and then offering a conclusion that manages to mock every possible anticipated ending—triumphant, tragic, artfully ambivalent—while being each, all at once. see, e.g., kolker (2000), pp. 238–41. flirting with splatter status even more brazenly, the coens' blood simple is both an exacting pastiche and a gross exaggeration of classic noir. silver and ward (1992), p. 419. adapted by director robinson devor from a novel by charles willeford, the woman chaser (1999) sends up not just the noir mode but the entire hollywood filmmaking process, with seemingly each shot staged as the visual equivalent of an acerbic marlowe wisecrack. holden (1999). in other media, the television series sledge hammer! (1986–88) lampoons noir, along with such topics as capital punishment, gun fetishism, and dirty harry. sesame street (1969–curr.) occasionally casts kermit the frog as a private eye; the sketches refer to some of the typical motifs of noir films, in particular the voiceover. garrison keillor's radio program a prairie home companion features the recurring character guy noir, a hardboiled detective whose adventures always wander into farce (guy also appears in the altman-directed film based on keillor's show). firesign theatre's nick danger has trod the same not-so-mean streets, both on radio and in comedy albums. cartoons such as garfield's babes and bullets (1989) and comic strip characters such as tracer bullet of calvin and hobbes have parodied both film noir and the kindred hardboiled tradition—one of the sources from which film noir sprang and which it now overshadows. irwin (2006), p. xii. ==identifying characteristics== some consider vertigo (1958) a noir on the basis of plot and tone and various motifs. others say the combination of color and the specificity of director alfred hitchcock's vision exclude it from the category. bould (2005), p. 18. in their original 1955 canon of film noir, raymond borde and etienne chaumeton identified twenty-two hollywood films released between 1941 and 1952 as core examples; they listed another fifty-nine american films from the period as significantly related to the field of noir. borde and chaumeton (2002), pp. 161–63. a half-century later, film historians and critics had come to agree on a canon of approximately three hundred films from 1940–58. silver and ward (1992) list 315 classic film noirs (passim), and tuska (1984) lists 320 (passim). later works are much more inclusive: paul duncan, the pocket essential film noir (2003), lists 647 (pp. 46–84). the title of micheal f. keaney's film noir guide: 745 films of the classic era, 1940–1959 (2003) is self-explanatory. there remain, however, many differences of opinion over whether other films of the era, among them a number of well-known ones, qualify as film noirs or not. for instance, the night of the hunter (1955), starring robert mitchum in an acclaimed performance, is treated as a film noir by some critics, but not by others. treated as noir: ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 34; hirsch (2001), pp. 59, 163–64, 168. excluded from canon: silver and ward (1992), p. 330. ignored: bould (2005); christopher (1998); ottoson (1981). some critics include suspicion (1941), directed by alfred hitchcock, in their catalogues of noir; others ignore it. included: bould (2005), p. 126; ottoson (1981), p. 174. ignored: ballinger and graydon (2007); hirsch (2001); christopher (1998). also see silver and ward (1992): ignored in 1980; included in 1988 (pp. 392, 396). concerning films made either before or after the classic period, or outside of the united states at any time, consensus is even rarer. to support their categorization of certain films as noirs and their rejection of others, many critics refer to a set of elements they see as marking examples of the mode. the question of what constitutes the set of noir's identifying characteristics is a fundamental source of controversy. for instance, critics tend to define the model film noir as having a tragic or bleak conclusion, see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 4; christopher (1998), p. 8. but many acknowledged classics of the genre have clearly happy endings (e.g., stranger on the third floor, the big sleep, dark passage, and the dark corner), while the tone of many other noir denouements is ambivalent. see, e.g., ray (1985), p. 159. some critics perceive classic noir's hallmark as a distinctive visual style. others, observing that there is actually considerable stylistic variety among noirs, instead emphasize plot and character type. still others focus on mood and attitude. no survey of classic noir's identifying characteristics can therefore be considered definitive. in the 1990s and 2000s, critics have increasingly turned their attention to that diverse field of films called neo-noir; once again, there is even less consensus about the defining attributes of such films made outside the classic period. williams (2005), pp. 34–37. ===visual style=== shadows of window blinds fall upon private eye jake gittes, performed by jack nicholson, in chinatown (1974). the low-key lighting schemes of many classic film noirs are associated with stark light/dark contrasts and dramatic shadow patterning—a style known as chiaroscuro (a term adopted from renaissance painting). the shadows of venetian blinds or banister rods, cast upon an actor, a wall, or an entire set, are an iconic visual in noir and had already become a cliché well before the neo-noir era. characters' faces may be partially or wholly obscured by darkness—a relative rarity in conventional hollywood filmmaking. while black-and-white cinematography is considered by many to be one of the essential attributes of classic noir, the color films leave her to heaven (1945) and niagara (1953) are routinely included in noir filmographies, while slightly scarlet (1956), party girl (1958), and vertigo (1958) are classified as noir by varying numbers of critics. see ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 31, on general issue. christopher (1998) and silver and ward (1992), for instance, include slightly scarlet and party girl, but not vertigo, in their filmographies. by contrast, hirsch (2001) describes vertigo as among those hitchcock films that are "richly, demonstrably noir" (p. 139) and ignores both slightly scarlet and party girl; bould (2005) similarly includes vertigo in his filmography, but not the other two. ottoson (1981) includes none of the three in his canon. film noir is also known for its use of low-angle, wide-angle, and skewed, or dutch angle shots. other devices of disorientation relatively common in film noir include shots of people reflected in one or more mirrors, shots through curved or frosted glass or other distorting objects (such as during the strangulation scene in strangers on a train), and special effects sequences of a sometimes bizarre nature. night-for-night shooting, as opposed to the hollywood norm of day-for-night, was often employed. place and peterson (1974), p. 67. from the mid-1940s forward, location shooting became increasingly frequent in noir. hirsch (2001), p. 67. in an analysis of the visual approach of kiss me deadly, a late and self-consciously stylized example of classic noir, critic alain silver describes how cinematographic choices emphasize the story's themes and mood. in one scene, the characters, seen through a "confusion of angular shapes", thus appear "caught in a tangible vortex or enclosed in a trap." silver makes a case for how "side light is used ... to reflect character ambivalence", while shots of characters in which they are lit from below "conform to a convention of visual expression which associates shadows cast upward of the face with the unnatural and ominous". silver (1995), pp. 219, 222. ===structure and narrational devices=== barbara stanwyck and burt lancaster were two of the most prolific stars of classic noir. the complex structure of sorry, wrong number (1948) involves a real-time framing story, multiple narrators, and flashbacks within flashbacks. telotte (1989), pp. 74–87. film noirs tend to have unusually convoluted story lines, frequently involving flashbacks and other editing techniques that disrupt and sometimes obscure the narrative sequence. framing the entire primary narrative as a flashback is also a standard device. voiceover narration, sometimes used as a structuring device, came to be seen as a noir hallmark; while classic noir is generally associated with first-person narration (i.e., by the protagonist), stephen neale notes that third-person narration is common among noirs of the semidocumentary style. neale (2000), pp. 166–67 n. 5. neo-noirs as varied as the element of crime (surrealist), after dark, my sweet (retro), and kiss kiss bang bang (meta) have employed the flashback/voiceover combination. bold experiments in cinematic storytelling were sometimes attempted during the classic era: lady in the lake, for example, is shot entirely from the point of view of protagonist philip marlowe; the face of star (and director) robert montgomery is seen only in mirrors. telotte (1989), p. 106. the chase (1946) takes oneirism and fatalism as the basis for its fantastical narrative system, redolent of certain horror stories, but with little precedent in the context of a putatively realistic genre. in their different ways, both sunset boulevard and d.o.a. are tales told by dead men. latter-day noir has been in the forefront of structural experimentation in popular cinema, as exemplified by such films as pulp fiction, fight club, and memento. rombes, nicholas, new punk cinema (2005), pp. 131–36. ===plots, characters, and settings=== crime, usually murder, is an element of almost all films noir; in addition to standard-issue greed, jealousy is frequently the criminal motivation. a crime investigation—by a private eye, a police detective (sometimes acting alone), or a concerned amateur—is the most prevalent, but far from dominant, basic plot. in other common plots the protagonists are implicated in heists or con games, or in murderous conspiracies often involving adulterous affairs. false suspicions and accusations of crime are frequent plot elements, as are betrayals and double-crosses. according to j. david slocum, "protagonists assume the literal identities of dead men in nearly fifteen percent of all noir." slocum (2001), p. 160. amnesia is fairly epidemic—"noir's version of the common cold", in the words of film historian lee server. server (2006), p. 149. by the late 1940s, the noir trend was leaving its mark on other genres. a prime example is the western pursued (1947), filled with psychosexual tensions and behavioral explanations derived from freudian theory. ottoson (1981), p. 143. films noir tend to revolve around heroes who are more flawed and morally questionable than the norm, often fall guys of one sort or another. the characteristic protagonists of noir are described by many critics as "alienated"; see, e.g., naremore (2008), p. 25; lyons (2000), p. 10. in the words of silver and ward, "filled with existential bitterness". silver and ward (1992), p. 6. certain archetypal characters appear in many films noir—hardboiled detectives, femme fatales, corrupt policemen, jealous husbands, intrepid claims adjusters, and down-and-out writers. among characters of every stripe, cigarette smoking is rampant. see, e.g., hirsch (2001), pp. 128, 150, 160, 213; christopher (1998), pp. 4, 32, 75, 83, 116, 118, 128, 155. from historical commentators to neo-noir pictures to pop culture ephemera, the private eye and the femme fatale have been adopted as the quintessential film noir figures, though they do not appear in most films now regarded as classic noir. of the twenty-three national film registry noirs, in only four does the star play a private eye: the maltese falcon, the big sleep, out of the past, and kiss me deadly. just four others readily qualify as detective stories: laura, the killers, the naked city, and touch of evil. film noir is often associated with an urban setting, and a few cities—los angeles, san francisco, new york, and chicago, in particular—are the location of many of the classic films. in the eyes of many critics, the city is presented in noir as a "labyrinth" or "maze". see, e.g., hirsch (2001), p. 17; christopher (1998), p. 17; telotte (1989), p. 148. bars, lounges, nightclubs, and gambling dens are frequently the scene of action. the climaxes of a substantial number of films noir take place in visually complex, often industrial settings, such as refineries, factories, trainyards, power plants—most famously the explosive conclusion of white heat, set at a chemical plant. ballinger and graydon (2007), pp. 217–18; hirsch (2001), p. 64. in the popular (and, frequently enough, critical) imagination, in noir it is always night and it always rains. see, e.g., bould (2005), p. 18, on the critical establishment of this iconography, as well as p. 35; hirsch (2001), p. 213; christopher (1998), p. 7. a substantial trend within latter-day noir—dubbed "film soleil" by critic d. k. holm—heads in precisely the opposite direction, with tales of deception, seduction, and corruption exploiting bright, sun-baked settings, stereotypically the desert or open water, to searing effect. significant predecessors from the classic and early post-classic eras include the lady from shanghai; the robert ryan vehicle inferno (1953); the french adaptation of patricia highsmith's the talented mr. ripley, plein soleil (purple noon in the u.s., more accurately rendered elsewhere as blazing sun or full sun; 1960); and director don siegel's version of the killers (1964). the tendency was at its peak during the late 1980s and 1990s, with films such as dead calm (1989); after dark, my sweet; the hot spot; delusion (1991); and red rock west, and tv's miami vice. holm (2005), pp. 13–25 passim. ===worldview, morality, and tone=== film noir is often described as essentially pessimistic. see, e.g., naremore (2008), p. 37, on the development of this viewpoint, and p. 103, on contributors to silver and ward encyclopedia; ottoson (1981), p. 1. the noir stories that are regarded as most characteristic tell of people trapped in unwanted situations (which, in general, they did not cause but are responsible for exacerbating), striving against random, uncaring fate, and frequently doomed. the films are seen as depicting a world that is inherently corrupt. see, e.g., ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 4; christopher (1998), pp. 7–8. classic film noir has been associated by many critics with the american social landscape of the era—in particular, with a sense of heightened anxiety and alienation that is said to have followed world war ii. in author nicholas christopher's opinion, "it is as if the war, and the social eruptions in its aftermath, unleashed demons that had been bottled up in the national psyche." christopher (1998), p. 37. film noirs, especially those of the 1950s and the height of the red scare, are often said to reflect cultural paranoia; kiss me deadly is the noir most frequently marshaled as evidence for this claim. see, e.g., muller (1998), p. 81, on analyses of the film; silver and ward (1992), p. 2. "you've got a touch of class, but i don't know how far you can go." "a lot depends on who's in the saddle." bogart and bacall in the big sleep. film noir is often said to be defined by "moral ambiguity", see, e.g., naremore (2008), p. 163, on critical claims of moral ambiguity; lyons (2000), pp. 14, 32. yet the production code obliged almost all classic noirs to see that steadfast virtue was ultimately rewarded and vice, in the absence of shame and redemption, severely punished (however dramatically incredible the final rendering of mandatory justice might be). a substantial number of latter-day noirs flout such conventions: vice emerges triumphant in films as varied as the grim chinatown and the ribald hot spot. see skoble (2006), pp. 41–48, for a survey of noir morality. the tone of film noir is generally regarded as downbeat; some critics experience it as darker still—"overwhelmingly black", according to robert ottoson. ottoson (1981), p. 1. influential critic (and filmmaker) paul schrader wrote in a seminal 1972 essay that "film noir is defined by tone", a tone he seems to perceive as "hopeless". schrader (1972), p. 54 silver and ursini. for characterization of definitive tone as "hopeless", see pp. 53 ("the tone more hopeless") and 57 ("a fatalistic, hopeless mood"). in describing the adaptation of double indemnity, noir analyst foster hirsch describes the "requisite hopeless tone" achieved by the filmmakers, which appears to characterize his view of noir as a whole. hirsch (2001), p. 7. hirsch subsequently states, "in character types, mood added, themes, and visual composition, double indemnity offer a lexicon of noir stylistics" (p. 8). on the other hand, definitive film noirs such as the big sleep, the lady from shanghai, and double indemnity itself are famed for their hardboiled repartee, often imbued with sexual innuendo and self-reflexive humor—notes of another tone. sanders (2006), p. 100. ==see also== * film gris * list of film noir titles ==notes== opinion is divided on the english plural of film noir. in the french from which the term derives, the plural is films noirs. some english speakers prefer films noir, while film noirs is the most common formulation. the merriam-webster online dictionary, which acknowledges all three styles as acceptable, lists film noirs first. his kind of woman was originally directed by john farrow, then largely reshot under richard fleischer after studio owner howard hughes demanded rewrites. only farrow was credited. server (2002), pp. 182–98, 209–16; downs (2002), p. 171; ottoson (1981), pp. 82–83. in academic dictionary of arts (2005), rakesh chopra notes that the high-contrast film lighting schemes commonly referred to as "chiaroscuro" are more specifically representative of tenebrism, whose first great exponent was the italian painter caravaggio (p. 73). see also ballinger and graydon (2007), p. 16. ==references== ==sources== * abbas, m. ackbar (1997). hong kong: culture and the politics of disappearance. minneapolis: university of minnesota press. isbn 978-0-8166-2924-4 * appel, afred (1974). nabokov's dark cinema. oxford and new york: oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-501834-9 * aziz, jamaluddin bin (2005). "future noir", chap. in "transgressing women: investigating space and the body in contemporary noir thrillers". ph. d. dissertation, department of english and creative writing, lancaster university (chapter available online). * ballinger, alexander, and danny graydon (2007). the rough guide to film noir. london: rough guides. isbn 978-1-84353-474-7 * bernstein, matthew (1995). "a tale of three cities: the banning of scarlet street", cinema journal 35, no. 1. * biesen, sheri chinen (2005). blackout: world war ii and the origins of film noir. baltimore: johns hopkins university press. isbn 978-0-8018-8217-3 * borde, raymond, and etienne chaumeton (2002 ). a panorama of american film noir, 1941–1953, trans. paul hammond. san francisco: city lights books. isbn 978-0-87286-412-2 * bould, mark (2005). film noir: from berlin to sin city. london and new york: wallflower. isbn 978-1-904764-50-2 * butler, david (2002). jazz noir: listening to music from phantom lady to the last seduction. westport, conn.: greenwood. isbn 978-0-275-97301-8 * cameron, ian, ed. (1993). the book of film noir. new york: continuum. isbn 978-0-8264-0589-0 * christopher, nicholas (1998 ). somewhere in the night: film noir and the american city, 1st paperback ed. new york: owl/henry holt. isbn 978-0-8050-5699-0 * clarens, carlos (1980). crime movies: an illustrated history. new york: w.w. norton. isbn 978-0-393-01262-0 * conard, mark t. (2007). the philosophy of neo-noir. lexington: university press of kentucky. isbn 978-0-8131-2422-3 * copjec, joan, ed. (1993). shades of noir. london and new york: verso. isbn 978-0-86091-625-3 * creeber, glen (2007). the singing detective. london: bfi publishing. isbn 978-1-84457-198-7 * dancyger, ken, and jeff rush (2002). alternative scriptwriting: successfully breaking the rules, 3d ed. boston and oxford: focal press. isbn 978-0-240-80477-4 * dargis, manohla (2004). "philosophizing sex dolls amid film noir intrigue", the new york times, september 17 (available online). * davis, blair (2004). "horror meets noir: the evolution of cinematic style, 1931–1958", in horror film: creating and marketing fear, ed. steffen hantke. jackson: university press of mississippi. isbn 978-1-57806-692-6 * downs, jacqueline (2002). "richard fleischer", in contemporary north american film directors: a wallflower critical guide, 2d ed., ed. yoram allon, del cullen, and hannah patterson. london and new york: wallflower. isbn 978-1-903364-52-9 * durgnat, raymond (1970). "paint it black: the family tree of the film noir", cinema 6/7 (collected in gorman et al., the big book of noir, and silver and ursini, film noir reader ). * erickson, glenn (2004). "fate seeks the loser: edgar g. ulmer's detour", in silver and ursini, film noir reader 4, pp. 25–31. * gorman, ed, lee server, and martin h. greenberg, eds. (1998). the big book of noir. new york: carroll  graf. isbn 978-0-7867-0574-0 * greene, naomi (1999). landscapes of loss: the national past in postwar french cinema. princeton, n.j.: princeton university press. isbn 978-0-691-00475-4 * greenspun, roger (1973). "mike hodges's 'pulp' opens; a private eye parody is parody of itself", the new york times, february 9 (available online). * hanson, helen (2008). hollywood heroines: women in film noir and the female gothic film. london and new york: i.b. tauris. isbn 978-1-84511-561-6 * hayde, michael j. (2001). my name's friday: the unauthorized but true story of dragnet and the films of jack webb. nashville, tenn.: cumberland house. isbn 978-1-58182-190-1 * hirsch, foster (1999). detours and lost highways: a map of neo-noir. pompton plains, n.j.: limelight. isbn 978-0-87910-288-3 * hirsch, foster (2001 ). the dark side of the screen: film noir. new york: da capo. isbn 978-0-306-81039-8 * holden, stephen (1999). "hard-boiled as a two-day-old egg at a two-bit diner", the new york times, october 8 (available online). * holm, d. k. (2005). film soleil. harpenden, uk: pocket essentials. isbn 978-1-904048-50-3 * hunter, stephen (1982). "blade runner", in his violent screen: a critic's 13 years on the front lines of movie mayhem (1995), pp. 196–99. baltimore: bancroft. isbn 978-0-9635376-4-5 * irwin, john t. (2006). unless the threat of death is behind them: hard-boiled fiction and film noir. baltimore: johns hopkins university press. isbn 978-0-8018-8435-1 * james, nick (2002). "back to the brats", in contemporary north american film directors, 2d ed., ed. yoram allon, del cullen, and hannah patterson, pp. xvi–xx. london: wallflower. isbn 978-1-903364-52-9 * jones, kristin m. (2009). "dark cynicism, british style", wall street journal, august 18 (available online). * kennedy, harlan (1982). "twenty-first century nervous breakdown", film comment, july/august. * kirgo, julie (1980). "farewell, my lovely (1975)", in silver and ward, film noir: an encyclopedic reference, pp. 101–2. * kolker, robert (2000). a cinema of loneliness, 3d ed. oxford and new york: oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-512350-0 * krutnik, frank, steve neale, and brian neve (2008). "un-american" hollywood: politics and film in the blacklist era. new brunswick, n.j.: rutgers university press. isbn 978-0-8135-4198-3 * lynch, david, and chris rodley (2005). lynch on lynch, rev. ed. new york and london: faber and faber. isbn 978-0-571-22018-2 * lyons, arthur (2000). death on the cheap: the lost b movies of film noir. new york: da capo. isbn 978-0-306-80996-5 * macek, carl (1980). "city streets (1931)", in silver and ward, film noir: an encyclopedic reference, pp. 59–60. * macek, carl, and alain silver (1980). "house on 92nd street (1945)", in silver and ward, film noir: an encyclopedic reference, pp. 134–35. * mackendrick, alexander (2006). on film-making: an introduction to the craft of the director. new york: macmillan. isbn 978-0-571-21125-8 * marshman, donald (1947). "mister 'see′-odd-mack'", life, august 25. * martin, richard (1997). mean streets and raging bulls: the legacy of film noir in contemporary american cinema. lanham, md.: scarecrow press. isbn 0-8108-3337-9 * maslin, janet (1996). "deadly plot by a milquetoast villain", the new york times, march 8 (available online). * mcgilligan, patrick (1997). fritz lang: the nature of the beast. new york and london: faber and faber. isbn 978-0-571-19375-2 * muller, eddie (1998). dark city: the lost world of film noir. new york: st. martin's. isbn 978-0-312-18076-8 * naremore, james (2008). more than night: film noir in its contexts, 2d ed. berkeley, los angeles, and london: university of california press. isbn 978-0-520-25402-2 * neale, steve (2000). genre and hollywood. london and new york: routledge. isbn 978-0-415-02606-2 * ottoson, robert (1981). a reference guide to the american film noir: 1940–1958. metuchen, n.j., and london: scarecrow press. isbn 978-0-8108-1363-2 * palmer, r. barton (2004). "the sociological turn of adaptation studies: the example of film noir", in a companion to literature and film, ed. robert stam and alessandra raengo, pp. 258–77. maiden, mass., oxford, and carlton, australia: blackwell. isbn 978-0-631-23053-3 * place, janey, and lowell peterson (1974). "some visual motifs of film noir", film comment 10, no. 1 (collected in silver and ursini, film noir reader ). * porfirio, robert (1980). "stranger on the third floor (1940)", in silver and ward, film noir: an encyclopedic reference, p. 269. * ray, robert b. (1985). a certain tendency of the hollywood cinema, 1930–1980. princeton, n.j.: princeton university press. isbn 978-0-691-10174-3 * richardson, carl (1992). autopsy: an element of realism in film noir. metuchen, n.j., and london: scarecrow press. isbn 978-0-8108-2496-6 * sanders, steven m. (2006). "film noir and the meaning of life", in the philosophy of film noir, ed. mark t. conard, pp. 91–106. lexington: university press of kentucky. isbn 978-0-8131-9181-2 * sarris, andrew (1996 ). the american cinema: directors and directions, 1929–1968. cambridge, mass.: da capo. isbn 978-0-306-80728-2 * schatz, thomas (1981). hollywood genres: formulas, filmmaking, and the studio system. new york: random house. isbn 978-0-07-553623-9 * schatz, thomas (1998 ). the genius of the system: hollywood filmmaking in the studio era, new ed. london: faber and faber. isbn 978-0-571-19596-1 * schrader, paul (1972). "notes on film noir", film comment 8, no. 1 (collected in silver and ursini, film noir reader ). * server, lee (2002). robert mitchum: "baby i don't care". new york: macmillan. isbn 978-0-312-28543-2 * server, lee (2006). ava gardner: "love is nothing". new york: macmillan. isbn 978-0-312-31209-1 * silver, alain (1996 ). "kiss me deadly: evidence of a style", rev. ver., in silver and ursini, film noir reader , pp. 209–35 (available online). * silver, alain (1996). "introduction", in silver and ursini, film noir reader , pp. 3–15 (available online). * silver, alain, and james ursini (and robert porfirio—vol. 3), eds. (2004 ). film noir reader, vols. 1–4. pompton plains, n.j.: limelight. * silver, alain, and elizabeth ward (1992). film noir: an encyclopedic reference to the american style, 3d ed. woodstock, n.y.: overlook press. isbn 978-0-87951-479-2 (see also: silver, ursini, ward, and porfirio . film noir: the encyclopedia, 4th rev., exp. ed. overlook. isbn 978-1-59020-144-2) * slocum, j. david (2001). violence and american cinema. london and new york: routledge. isbn 978-0-415-92810-6 * spicer, andrew (2007). european film noir. manchester, uk: manchester university press. isbn 978-0-7190-6791-4 * telotte, j. p. (1989). voices in the dark: the narrative patterns of film noir. urbana and chicago: university of illinois press. isbn 978-0-252-06056-4 * thomson, david (1998). a biographical dictionary of film, 3d ed. new york: knopf. isbn 978-0-679-75564-7 * turan, kenneth (2008). "ucla's pre-code series", los angeles times, january 27 (available online). * tuska, jon (1984). dark cinema: american film noir in cultural perspective. westport, conn., and london: greenwood. isbn 978-0-313-23045-5 * tyree, j. m., and ben walters (2007). the big lebowski. london: bfi publishing. isbn 978-1-84457-173-4 * ursini, james (1995). "angst at sixty fields per second", in silver and ursini, film noir reader , pp. 275–87. * "variety staff" (anon.) (1940). "stranger on the third floor" , variety (excerpted online). * "variety staff" (anon.) (1955). "kiss me deadly" , variety (excerpted online). * vernet, marc (1993). "film noir on the edge of doom", in copjec, shades of noir, pp. 1–31. * wager, jans b. (2005). dames in the driver's seat: rereading film noir. austin: university of texas press. isbn 978-0-292-70966-9 * walker, michael (1992). "robert siodmak", in cameron, the book of film noir, pp. 110–51. * white, dennis l. (1980). "beast of the city (1932)", in silver and ward, film noir: an encyclopedic reference, pp. 16–17. * widdicombe, toby (2001). a reader's guide to raymond chandler. westport, conn.: greenwood. isbn 978-0-313-30767-6 * williams, linda ruth (2005). the erotic thriller in contemporary cinema. bloomington: indiana university press. isbn 978-0-253-34713-8 ==further reading== * chopra-gant, mike (2005). hollywood genres and postwar america: masculinity, family and nation in popular movies and film noir. london: ib tauris. isbn 978-1-85043-838-0 * cochran, david (2000). america noir: underground writers and filmmakers of the postwar era. washington, d.c.: smithsonian institution press. isbn 978-1-56098-813-7 * dickos, andrew (2002). street with no name: a history of the classic american film noir. lexington: university press of kentucky. isbn 978-0-8131-2243-4 * dimendberg, edward (2004). film noir and the spaces of modernity. cambridge, mass., and london: harvard university press. isbn 978-0-674-01314-8 * dixon, wheeler winston (2009). film noir and the cinema of paranoia. new brunswick, n.j.: rutgers university press. isbn 978-0-8135-4521-9 * grossman, julie (2009). rethinking the femme fatale in film noir: ready for her close-up. basingstoke, uk: palgrave macmillan. isbn 978-0-230-23328-7 * hannsberry, karen burroughs (1998). femme noir: bad girls of film. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland. isbn 978-0-7864-0429-2 * hannsberry, karen burroughs (2003). bad boys: the actors of film noir. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland. isbn 978-0-7864-1484-0 * hare, william (2003). early film noir: greed, lust, and murder hollywood style. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland. isbn 978-0-7864-1629-5 * kaplan, e. ann, ed. (1998). women in film noir, new ed. london: british film institute. isbn 978-0-85170-666-5 * keaney, michael f. (2003). film noir guide: 745 films of the classic era, 1940–1959. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland. isbn 978-0-7864-1547-2 * mason, fran (2002). american gangster cinema: from little caesar to pulp fiction. houndmills, uk: palgrave. isbn 978-0-333-67452-9 * mayer, geoff, and brian mcdonnell (2007). encyclopedia of film noir. westport, conn.: greenwood. isbn 978-0-313-33306-4 * mcarthur, colin (1972). underworld u.s.a. new york: viking. isbn 978-0-670-01953-3 * palmer, r. barton (1994). hollywood's dark cinema: the american film noir. new york: twayne. isbn 978-0-8057-9335-2 * palmer, r. barton, ed. (1996). perspectives on film noir. new york: g.k. hall. isbn 978-0-8161-1601-0 * pappas, charles (2005). it's a bitter little world: the smartest, toughest, nastiest quotes from film noir. iola, wisc.: writer's digest books. isbn 978-1-58297-387-6 * rabinowitz, paula (2002). black  white  noir: america's pulp modernism. new york: columbia university press. isbn 978-0-231-11481-3 * schatz, thomas (1997). boom and bust: american cinema in the 1940s. berkeley, los angeles, and london: university of california press. isbn 978-0-684-19151-5 * selby, spencer (1984). dark city: the film noir. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland. isbn 978-0-89950-103-1 * shadoian, jack (2003). dreams and dead ends: the american gangster film, 2d ed. oxford and new york: oxford university press. isbn 978-0-19-514291-4 * silver, alain, and james ursini (1999). the noir style. woodstock, n.y.: overlook press. isbn 978-0-87951-722-9 * spicer, andrew (2002). film noir. harlow, uk: pearson education. isbn 978-0-582-43712-8 ==external links== * film noir qa-style essay by leading noir critic-historian eddie muller; part of the greencine website * film noir: a bibliography of materials and film videography holdings of the uc berkeley library * film noir: an introduction essay with links to discussions of ten important noirs; part of images: a journal of film and popular culture * film noir studies writings by john blaser, with film noir glossary, timeline, and noir-related media * a guide to film noir genre ten deadeye bullet points from roger ebert * an introduction to neo-noir essay by lee horsley * the noir thriller: introduction excerpt from 2001 book by lee horsley * what is this thing called noir?: parts i, ii and iii essay by alain silver and linda brookover * arthur lyons film noir festival, co-sponsored by the palm springs cultural center
film crewfilm crew and equipment on a location shoot a film crew is a group of people hired by a production company for the purpose of producing a film or motion picture. crew are distinguished from cast, the actors who appear in front of the camera or provide voices for characters in the film. crew are also separate from producers, those who own a portion of either the film company or the film's intellectual property rights. a film crew is divided into different sectors, each of which specializes in a specific aspect of the production. television crew positions are derived from those of film crew. == production == production is generally not considered a department as such, but rather as a series of functional groups. these include the front office staff such as the production manager, the production coordinator, and their assistants; the accounting staff; the various assistant directors; and sometimes the locations manager and their assistants. the director is considered to be a separate entity, not within the departmental structure. * producer : a film producer creates the conditions for making movies. the producer initiates, coordinates, supervises, and controls matters such as raising funding, hiring key personnel, and arranging for distributors. the producer is involved throughout all phases of the film making process from development to completion of a project. * executive producer : an executive producer (ep) is a producer who is not involved in the technical aspects of the filmmaking process, but has played a crucial financial or creative role in ensuring that the project goes into production. there may be several executive producers on a film who may take the lead role in a number of areas, such as development, financing or production. executive producers must be excellent negotiators. they need a keen business sense, and an intimate knowledge of all aspects of film production, financing, marketing and distribution. executive producers are responsible for the overall quality control of productions. on some productions the executive producer role may be combined with other roles, so that as well as raising the finance they may also be responsible for managing the budget during production. executive producers must be able to identify commercial, marketable projects. executive producers have overall responsibility for the successful financing and marketing of these projects. during production, executive producers may be involved in some aspects of scripting, casting, and crewing. executive producers often work on a number of projects simultaneously. they are experienced industry practitioners, who have usually worked previously for a number of years in any one of a variety of roles, such as producer, writer, director or script editor. most have some hands on experience of producing. * line producer : the line producer is the liaison between the studio or producer and the production manager. * production manager : the production manager supervises the physical aspects of the production (not the creative aspects) including personnel, technology, budget, and scheduling. it is the production manager's responsibility to make sure the filming stays on schedule and within its budget. the pm also helps manage the day-to-day budget by managing operating costs such as salaries, production costs, and everyday equipment rental costs. the pm often works under the supervision of a line producer and directly supervises the production coordinator. * unit manager : the unit manager fulfills the same role as the production manager but for secondary "unit" shooting. in some functional structures, the unit manager subsumes the role of the transport coordinator. * production coordinator : the production coordinator is the information nexus of the production, responsible for organizing all the logistics from hiring crew, renting equipment, and booking talent. the pc is an integral part of film production. * post-production supervisor : post-production supervisors are responsible for the post-production process, during which they maintain clarity of information and good channels of communication between the producer, editor, supervising sound editor, the facilities companies (such as film labs, cgi studios and negative cutters) and the production accountant. although this is not a creative role, it is pivotal in ensuring that the film's post-production budget is manageable and achievable, and that all deadlines are met. because large amounts of money are involved, and most of a film's budget is spent during production, the post-production period can often be difficult and challenging. * production assistant : production assistants, referred to as pas, assist in the production office or in various departments with general tasks, such as assisting the first assistant director with set operations. * screenwriter : the screenwriter, or scriptwriter, may pitch a finished script to potential producers, or may write a script under contract to a producer. a writer may be involved, to varied degrees, with creative aspects of production. * script supervisor : also known as the continuity person, the script supervisor keeps track of what parts of the script have been filmed and makes notes of any deviations between what was actually filmed and what appeared in the script. they make notes on every shot, and keep track of props, blocking, and other details to ensure continuity from shot to shot and scene to scene. the script supervisor's notes are given to the editor to expedite the editing process. the script supervisor works very closely with the director on set. * stunt coordinator : where the film requires a stunt, and involves the use of stunt performers, the stunt coordinator will arrange the casting and performance of the stunt, working closely with the director. * casting director : the casting director chooses the actors for the characters of the film. this usually involves inviting potential actors to read an excerpt from the script for an audition. === directing === * director : the director is responsible for overseeing the creative aspects of a film, including controlling the content and flow of the film's plot, directing the performances of actors, organizing and selecting the locations in which the film will be shot, and managing technical details such as the positioning of cameras, the use of lighting, and the timing and content of the film's soundtrack. though directors wield a great deal of power, they are ultimately subordinate to the film's producer or producers. some directors, especially more established ones, take on many of the roles of a producer, and the distinction between the two roles is sometimes blurred. * first assistant director : the first assistant director (1st ad) assists the production manager and director. the ultimate aim of any 1st ad is to ensure the film comes in on schedule while maintaining a working environment in which the director, principal artists (actors) and crew can be focused on their work. they oversee day-to-day management of the cast and crew scheduling, equipment, script, and set. a 1st ad may also be responsible for directing background action for major shots or the entirety of relatively minor shots, at the director's discretion. * second assistant director : the second assistant director (2nd ad) is the chief assistant of the 1st ad and helps carry out those tasks delegated to the 1st ad. the 2nd ad may also direct background action and extras in addition to helping the 1st ad with scheduling, booking, etc. the 2nd ad is responsible for creating call sheets that let the crew know the schedule and important details about the shooting day. in canadian and british functional structures there are 3rd ads and even trainee ads; in the american system there are 2nd 2nd ads. === locations === * location manager : oversees the locations department and its staff, typically reporting directly to the production manager and/or assistant director (or even director and/or executive producer). location manager is responsible for final clearing (or guaranteeing permission to use) a location for filming and must often assist production/finance dept(s) in maintaining budget management regarding actual location/permit fees as well as labor costs to production for himself and the locations department at large. * assistant location manager : works with the location manager and the various departments in arranging technical scouts for the essential staff (grips, electric, camera, etc.) to see options which the location manager has selected for filming. the assistant location manager will be onset during the filming process to oversee the operation, whereas the location manager continues preproduction from elsewhere (generally an office) on the upcoming locations. (note: on most location-based television shows, there will be two assistant location managers that alternate episodes, allowing one to prep an upcoming episode while the other is on-set with the current one.) * location scout : does much of the actual research, footwork and photography to document location possibilities. often the location manager will do some scouting himself, as well as the assistant location manager. * location assistant : hired by the location manager to be on-set before, during, and after the filming process. general responsibilities include arriving first at the location to allow the set dressers into the set for preparation; maintaining the cleanliness of the location areas during filming; fielding complaints from neighbors; and ultimately, at the end of the filming, making sure it seems as though the film crew was never there. there is generally one to three assistants on a shoot at any given time. * location production assistant : this position exists generally on larger budget productions. the locations pa is the assistant who is almost never on-set, but instead is always prepping a location or wrapping a location. that is, when a location requires several days of set up and breakdown prior and following the day(s) of filming. a location production assistant is what a set production assistant is in canada. === additional production credits === since the turn of the 21st century, several additional professionals are now routinely listed in the production credits on most major motion pictures. *legal counsel : entertainment lawyers negotiate contracts, clear licensing rights for any intellectual property used in the film, obtain tax credits from local governments, and take care of immigration paperwork when cast and/or crew cross international borders to shoot on location. *accountant : production accountants manage the money and ensure the production comes in on budget and everyone gets paid. the industry is notorious for unusual accounting methods which are collectively labeled hollywood accounting. *insurance broker : due to the rising cost of computer-generated special effects, shooting on location, and a-list talent, major motion picture budgets continue to set new records each decade. as a result, most investors will not commit to financing a film unless an insurer can be found to protect them against the risk that the film ultimately cannot be released as a result of a total catastrophe such as total loss of film negatives (or digital media), death of the director or stars during production, natural disasters destroying the sets, and so on. insurance brokers help arrange for the insurance coverage that in turn makes a production financially feasible. * system administrator : a system administrator or sysadmin, is a person employed to maintain and operate a computer system or network. this role is increasingly important for digital monitors on set, digital intermediate editing and post production, digital effects, digital sound, and sometimes for full digital production. == art department == the art department in a major feature film can often number hundreds of people. usually it is considered to include several sub-departments: the art department proper, with its art director, set designers and draughtsmen; set decoration, under the set decorator; props, under the propmaster; construction, headed by the construction coordinator; scenic, headed by the key scenic artist; and special effects. * production designer : also known as the creative director, the production designer is responsible for creating the physical, visual appearance of the film - settings, costumes, character makeup, all taken as a unit. the production designer works closely with the director and the cinematographer to achieve the look of the film. === art === within the overall art department is a sub-department, called the art department, which can be confusing. this consists of the people who design the sets and create the graphic art. * art director : the art director reports to the production designer, and more directly oversees artists and craftspeople, such as the set designers, graphic artists, and illustrators who give form to the production design as it develops. the art director works closely with the construction coordinator to oversee the aesthetic and textural details of sets as they are realized. * assistant art director : the first, second and third assistant art directors carry out the instructions of the art director. their work often involves measuring locations, collecting information for the production designer. sometimes a set designer is also the first assistant art director. in this capacity, they manage the work flow and act as the foreman of the drawing office. * illustrator : the illustrator draws or paints visual representations of the designs to communicate the ideas imagined by the production designer. === sets === * set designer : the set designer is the draftsman, often an architect, who realizes the structures or interior spaces called for by the production designer. * set decorator : the set decorator is in charge of the decorating of a film set, which includes the furnishings and all the other objects that will be seen in the film. they work closely with the production designer and coordinate with the art director. in recognition of the set decorator's importance, the academy award for art direction is given jointly to both the production designer and the set decorator. * buyer : the buyer works with the set decorator. the buyer locates, and then purchases or rents the set dressing. * lead man : the lead man is the foreman of the sets crew, often referred to as the swing gang. he or she also assists the set decorator. * set dresser : the set dressers apply and remove the "dressing", i.e., furniture, drapery, carpets—everything one would find in a location, even doorknobs and wall sockets. most of the swing gang's work occurs before and after the shooting crew arrives but one set dresser remains with the shooting crew and is known as the on-set dresser. in some countries, such as great britain and the republic of ireland, the set dressing department is referred to as dressing props department. * greensman : the greensman is a specialised set dresser dealing with the artistic arrangement or landscape design of plant material, sometimes real and sometimes artificial, and usually a combination of both. depending on the scope of the greens work in a film, the greensman may report to the art director or may report directly to the production designer. if a significant amount of greens work is required in a film, then the greens may be an identifiable sub-department, with its own team - often of a size numbering double figures - and hierarchy (e.g. greensmaster, greens supervisor, foreperson, leading hand, laborers). specialists from other areas of the art dept. (e.g. fabricators, sculptors, painters/scenics) may also be drafted to work exclusively on greens. ==== construction ==== * construction coordinator : the construction coordinator oversees the construction of all the sets. the coordinator orders materials, schedules the work, and supervises the often sizeable construction crew of carpenters, painters and labourers. in some jurisdictions the construction coordinator is called the construction manager. * head carpenter : the head carpenter is the foreman of a gang of carpenters and laborers. * key scenic : the key scenic artist is responsible for the surface treatments of the sets. this includes special paint treatments such as aging and gilding, as well as simulating the appearance of wood, stone, brick, metal, stained glass--anything called for by the production designer. the key scenic artist supervises the crew of painters, and is often a master craftsperson. in the uk, the above responsibilities would normally be those of the head painter, and the scenic artist is responsible for producing artist painted backings. === props === * props master : the property master is in charge of finding and managing all the props that appear in the film. the props master usually has several assistants. * propmaker : the propmaker, as the name implies, builds the props that are used for the film. props builders are often technicians skilled in construction, plastics casting, machining, and electronics. * weapons master : the weapons master, or armorer is a specialized prop technician who deals with firearms. in most jurisdictions this requires special training and licenses. === costume department === * costume designer : the costume designer is responsible for all the clothing and costumes worn by all the actors that appear on screen. they are also responsible for designing, planning, and organizing the construction of the garments down to the fabric, colors, and sizes. the costume designer works closely with the director to understand and interpret "character", and counsels with the production designer to achieve an overall tone of the film. in large productions, the costume designer will usually have one or more assistant costume designers. * costume supervisor : the costume supervisor works closely with the designer. in addition to helping with the design of the costumes, they manage the wardrobe workspace. they supervise construction or sourcing of garments, hiring and firing of support staff, budget, paperwork, and department logistics. also called the wardrobe supervisor, although this term is used less and less. * key costumer : the key costumer is employed on larger productions to manage the set costumers, and to handle the star's wardrobe needs. * costume standby : the costume standby is present on set at all times. it is his/her responsibility to monitor the quality and continuity of the actors and actresses costumes before and during takes. (s)he will also assist the actors and actresses with dressing. * art finisher : an art finisher, or breakdown artist, may be employed during the pre-production setup to break down garments. this specialized job includes making new clothing appear dirty, faded and worn. * costume buyer : on large productions a buyer may be employed to source and purchase fabrics and garments. a buyer might also be referred to as a shopper. this distinction is often made when the lead actor in a production has control over their wardrobe, and they may personally hire this person. * cutter : a costume technician who fits or tailors costumes, usually on-set. they might also be called fitter, seamstress or tailor. some celebrity actors have favorite cutters, and larger productions may hire several and have them on set at the same time, particularly in period film projects that might have complicated or expensive extras wardrobe. === hair and make-up === some actors or actresses have personal makeup artists or hair stylists. * make-up artist : make-up artists work with makeup, hair and special effects to create the characters look for anyone appearing on screen. their role is to manipulate an actor's on-screen appearance whether it makes them look more youthful, larger, older, or in some cases monstrous. there are also body makeup artists who concentrate their abilities on the body rather than the head. * hairdresser : the hairdresser, or hair stylist, is responsible for maintaining and styling the hair of anyone appearing on screen. they work in conjunction with the makeup artist. === special effects === this department oversees the mechanical effects—also called practical or physical effects—that create optical illusions during live-action shooting. it is not to be confused with the visual effects department, which adds photographic effects during filming to be altered later during video editing in the post-production process. * special effects supervisor : the special effects supervisor instructs the special effects crew on how to design moving set elements and props that will safely break, explode, burn, collapse and implode without destroying the film set. s/he is also responsible for reproducing weather conditions and other on-camera magic. * special effects assistant : the sfx assistants carry out the instructions of the special effects supervisor, building set pieces like breakaway furniture and cities in miniature, lighting pyrotechnics, and setting up rigging equipment for stunts. they also assist in prosthetic makeup. == camera == a camera operator filming a scene from the 1950 hollywood film julius caesar starring charlton heston * cinematographer : the term cinematographer has been a point of contention for some time now. it is usually synonymous with director of photography, though some professionals insist this only applies when the director of photography and camera operator are the same person. * director of photography : the director of photography, dop or dp, is the chief of the camera and lighting crew of the film. the dop makes decisions on lighting and framing of scenes in conjunction with the film's director. typically, the director tells the dop how he or she wants a shot to look, and the dop chooses the correct aperture, filter, and lighting to achieve the desired effect as per the director's requirements. * camera operator : the camera operator uses the camera at the direction of the cinematographer, director of photography, or the film director to capture the scenes on film. generally, a cinematographer or director of photography does not operate the camera, but sometimes these jobs may be combined. * first assistant camera : the first assistant camera, 1st ac or focus puller, is responsible for keeping the camera in focus as it is shooting, as well as building the camera at the beginning of the day and taking it apart at the end. they also thread the film when a new magazine is loaded. * second assistant camera : the second assistant camera, 2nd ac or clapper loader, operates the clapperboard at the beginning of each take and loads the raw film stock into the camera magazines between takes, if there is no additional specifically designated film loader. the 2nd ac is also in charge of overseeing the meticulously kept notebooks that record when the film stock is received, used, and sent to the lab for processing. additionally, the 2nd ac oversees organization of camera equipment and transport of the equipment from one shooting location to another. * film loader : the loader transfers motion picture film from the manufacturer's light-tight canisters to the camera magazines for attachment to the camera by the 2nd ac. after exposure during filming, the loader then removes the film from the magazines and places it back into the light-tight cans for transport to the laboratory. it is the responsibility of the loader to manage the inventory of film and communicate with the 1st ac on the film usage and remaining stock throughout the day. on small production crews, this job is often combined with the 2nd ac. with the prevalence of digital photography, this role is taken on by the digital imaging technician. * camera production assistant : the camera pa, camera intern or camera trainee, assists the crew while learning the trade of the camera assistant, operator or cinematographer. * digital imaging technician : on digital photography productions the digital imaging technician, or dit, is responsible for the coordination of the internal workings of the digital camera. under the direction of the cinematographer or director of photography, the dit will make adjustments to the multitude of variables available in most professional digital cameras to creatively or technically manipulate the resulting image. it may also be the responsibility of the dit to archive and manage the digital data, create compressed dailies from raw footage and prepare all digital images for post-production. * steadicam operator : a steadicam operator is someone who is skilled at operating a steadicam (trademark for a camera stabilization rig). this person is usually one of the camera operators on the production. * motion control technician/operator : this technician operates a motion control rig, which essentially is a 'camera robot' able to consistently repeat camera moves for special effects uses. motion control rigs are typically rented with an experienced operator. == production sound == * production sound mixer : the production sound mixer is head of the sound department on set, responsible for recording all sound during filming. this involves the choice and deployment of microphones, operation of a sound recording device, and sometimes the mixing of audio signals in real time. * boom operator : the boom operator is an assistant to the production sound mixer, responsible for microphone placement and movement during filming. the boom operator uses a boom pole, a long pole made of light aluminum or carbon fiber that allows precise positioning of the microphone above or below the actors, just out of the camera's frame. the boom operator may also place radio microphones and hidden set microphones. in france, the boom operator is called the perchman. * utility sound technician : the utility sound technician has a dynamic role in the sound department, most typically pulling cables, but often acting as an additional boom operator or mixer when required by complex filming circumstances. not all films employ a utility sound technician, but the increasing complexities of location sound recording in modern film have made the job more prevalent. this role is sometimes credited as cable puller or python wrangler. == grip == grips are trained lighting and rigging technicians. their main responsibility is to work closely with the electrical department to put in the non-electrical components of lighting set-ups required for a shot, such as flags, overheads, and bounces. on the sound stage, they move and adjust major set pieces when something needs to be moved to get a camera into position. they may belong to the international alliance of theatrical stage employees. * key grip : the key grip is the chief grip on a set, and is the head of the set operations department. the key grip works with the director of photography to help set up the set and to achieve correct lighting and blocking. * best boy (grip) : the best boy is chief assistant to the key grip. they are also responsible for organizing the grip truck throughout the day. * dolly grip : the grip in charge of operating the camera dollies and camera cranes is called the dolly grip. they place, level, and move the dolly track, then push and pull the dolly, and usually a camera operator and camera assistant as riders. * grips : grips report to the key grip and are responsible for lifting heavy things and setting rigging points for lights. == electrical == * gaffer : the gaffer is the head of the electrical department, responsible for the design and execution of the electrical distribution and lighting plan for a production. sometimes the gaffer is credited as chief lighting technician. * best boy (electrical) : the best boy is the chief assistant to the gaffer. he or she is not usually on set, but dealing with the electric truck, rentals, manpower, and other logistics. * lighting technician : lighting technicians are involved with setting up and controlling lighting equipment. == post-production == === editorial === * film editor : the film editor is the person who assembles the various shots into a coherent film, with the help of the director. there are usually several assistant editors. * negative cutter : the negative cutter cuts and splices the negatives as directed by the film editor, and then provides the assembled negative reels to the lab in order for prints (positives for projection) to be made. * colorist : with a photochemical process, the color timer adjusts the color of the film via printer lights for greater consistency in the film's colors. with a digital intermediate process, the colorist can use digital tools in manipulating the image and has greater creative freedom in changing the aesthetic of a film. * telecine colorist : a telecine colorist is responsible for a grade - that is a look that has been created with a grading system, which adjusts brightness, contrast and color. === visual effects === visual effects commonly refers to post-production alterations of the film's images. the on set vfx crew works to prepare shots and plates for future visual effects. this may include adding tracking markers, taking and asking for reference plates and helping the director understand the limitations and ease of certain shots that will effect the future post production. a vfx crew can also work alongside the special effects department for any on-set optical effects that need physical representation during filming (on camera.) * visual effects producer : the visual effects producer works with the visual effects supervisor to break down the script into storyboards, and advises the director as to how s/he should approach the scenes. together they determine which sequences are to be shot as live action elements, which would work well in miniature, and which (if any) should be computer generated. * visual effects creative director : vfx creative directors are very much like production designers, except they direct and supervise the creative side of the film's visual effects. the position is particularly in demand for films with massive amounts of computer generated imagery and scenes. * visual effects supervisor : the visual effects supervisor is in charge of the vfx crew, working with production and the film's director to achieve the desired in-camera optical effects of the film. * visual effects editor : the visual effects editor incorporates visual effects into the current cuts of live action sequences, producing multiple versions of each shot. altered scenes are then evaluated by the visual effects supervisor and creative director for aesthetic and technical direction, and by the producers for review and final editing. * compositor : a compositor is a visual effects artist responsible for compositing images from different sources such as video, film, computer generated 3-d imagery, 2-d animations, matte paintings, photographs, and text. * rotoscope artists/ paint artists : rotoscope  painters artists may rotoscope the footage, manually creating mattes for use in compositing. they may also paint visual information into or out of a scene, such removing wires and rigs, logos, dust busting, scratch removal, etc. * matte painter : matte painters draw/paint entire sets or extend portions of an existing set. === sound/music === * sound designer : the sound designer, or supervising sound editor, is in charge of the post-production sound of a movie. sometimes this may involve great creative license, and other times it may simply mean working with the director and editor to balance the sound to their liking. * dialogue editor : the dialogue editor is responsible for assembling and editing all the dialog in the soundtrack. * sound editor : the sound editor is responsible for assembling and editing all the sound effects in the soundtrack. * re-recording mixer : the re-recording mixer balances all of the sounds prepared by the dialogue, music and effects editors, and finalizes the films audio track. * music supervisor : the music supervisor, or music director, works with the composer, mixers and editors to create and integrate the film's music. in hollywood a music supervisor's primary responsibility is to act as liaison between the film production and the recording industry, negotiating the use rights for all source music used in a film. * composer : the composer is responsible for writing the musical score for a film. * foley artist : the foley artist is the person who creates many of the ambient or routine sound effects for a film. == references == === notes === === further reading === == external links == * the knowledge uk film crew  company directory a directory of uk film and tv crew * film crew pro a global jobs and networking resource for film and television professionals
list of film institutessome notable institutions celebrating film, including both national film institutes and independent and non-profit organizations. * american film institute * american indian film institute * australian film institute * british film institute * matrikas film school * canadian film institute * danish film institute * doha film institute * deutsche kinemathek * film and television institute of india * finnish film foundation * film institute of ireland * hong kong film institute * italian film institute * mexican film institute * norwegian film institute * sundance institute * swedish film institute * east coast film institute ==references== ==see also== *list of film schools and programs film institutes
fearless (1993 film)fearless is a 1993 film directed by peter weir and written by rafael yglesias from his novel of the same name. it was shot entirely in california. rosie perez was nominated for an academy award for best supporting actress for her role as carla rodrigo. (she lost to anna paquin for the piano.) the film was also entered into the 44th berlin international film festival. jeff bridges' role as max klein is widely regarded as one of the best performances of his career. the film's soundtrack features part of the first movement of henryk górecki's symphony no. 3, subtitled symphony of sorrowful songs. the plot is based on details of united airlines flight 232. ==plot== while taking a business trip, architect max klein (jeff bridges) survives a crash of a flight headed from san francisco to houston. as the plane was descending max inexplicably becomes at peace when he accepts he is going to die. the revelation inspires him to comfort many of the fearful passengers, even moving to sit next to byron hummel (daniel cerny), a young boy flying alone. the psychological trauma of the experience transforms his personality and he enters an altered state of consciousness, rethinking his life and becoming preoccupied with existential questions of life and death. immediately after the crash, max, one of the plane's few survivors, rents a car and drives from the crash site in bakersfield to los angeles, stopping on the way to visit his old high school sweetheart, alison (debra monk), whom he hasn't seen in 20 years. during their meal at a restaurant alison notices max eating a strawberry and inquires about his allergy to them. max grins and explains he's "gotten past" his allergic reaction and confidently finishes it with no problems. he's tracked down at a hotel room the next morning by f.b.i. agents who question his odd choice to not contact his wife and family or remain at the crash site with the other survivors. the airline sends a representative who compensates him with train tickets to go home to san francisco. max declines the tickets, stating adamantly that he wants to fly home and has no fear of air travel anymore. on the flight he meets dr. bill perlman (john turturro), an airline-contracted psychiatrist who offers to counsel max for post-traumatic stress disorder. dr. perlman accompanies max back to his home where his wife lauren (isabella rossellini) begins noticing his strange behavior. max matter-of-factly tells nan gordon (deirdre o'connell), the wife of his friend and business partner, that her husband jeff (john de lancie) died in the crash. the media dubs max "the good samaritan" and tries to interview him as byron comes to publicly thank him for the way he comforted the passengers during the crash, but max avoids making a statement. over time max becomes distant from lauren and his son jonah (spencer vrooman) because of his preoccupation with his near death experience. he begins drawing abstract pictures of the crash and his sense of a hole opening in the sky before him. he comes to think of himself as invulnerable to death causing dr. perlman to become concerned that max is delusional. perlman encourages max to meet with another survivor, carla rodrigo (rosie perez), in the hope that the two can help support one another. carla, who lost her baby son in the crash, struggles with survivor's guilt, punishing herself for not holding onto him tightly enough when his seat belt on the plane malfunctioned. max and carla bond and develop an close friendship as he helps her to get past her depression and free herself from her guilt. max, lauren and nan meet with attorney steven brillstein (tom hulce), who encourages max to exaggerate his testimony in order to increase nan's compensation settlement offer from the airline. max states his discomfort with lying but reluctantly agrees when he considers nan's financial predicament as a widow. the unease of lying causes max to have a panic attack and he runs out of the office to the roof of the building where he climbs onto the ledge. as max stands on the ledge, looking down at the streets below, his panic attack subsides and he rejoices in his fearlessness. lauren follows max onto the roof and upon finding him, believes him to be suicidal. eventually max's increasingly dramatic attempts at pushing the boundaries between life and death succeed in jolting carla from her uncertain state. however, after parting company with carla, max remains aloof in his relationship with his wife and son. brillstein arrives at the klein home to celebrate the pending settlement offer, and brings a basket with an assortment of fruits. max eats one of the strawberries but, unlike at the restaurant, this time he experiences an allergic reaction and suffocates. as he lay choking, max accepts the reality of his death when suddenly he's resuscitated by lauren. he survives and (it's implied) recovers his emotional connection to his family and to the world. the ascent into the empyrean ==cast== * jeff bridges as max klein * isabella rossellini as lauren klein * rosie perez as carla rodrigo * tom hulce as brillstein * john turturro as dr. bill perlman * benicio del toro as manny rodrigo * deirdre o'connell as nan gordon * john de lancie as jeff gordon * debra monk as alison ==aesthetic elements== a book containing the painting the ascent into the empyrean by hieronymus bosch is shown, and it is said that the dying go into the light of heaven "naked and alone". the final scene appears to be modeled on the painting. ==reception== the film was positively received by critics as review aggregator rotten tomatoes evaluates that 86% of critics have given the film a positive review, based on 28 reviews, with an average score of 7.7/10. ==references== ==external links==
film stock:this focuses on motion picture film. for still photography film, see photographic film. a film strip film stock is an analog media that was, before the widespread usage of the digital media for the same purpose, used for recording motion pictures or animations. the analog equivalent in television production was videotape. ==history== ===1889–1899: before standardization=== early motion picture experiments were performed using a fragile paper roll film, which was difficult to view a single, continuously moving image without complex apparatus. the first transparent and flexible film base material was celluloid, which was discovered and refined for photographic use by john carbutt, hannibal goodwin, and george eastman. eastman kodak made celluloid film commercially available in 1889; thomas henry blair, in 1891, was its first competitor. the stock had a frosted base to facilitate easier viewing by transmitted light. emulsions were orthochromatic. by november 1891 william dickson, at edison's laboratory, was using blair's stock for kinetoscope experiments. blair's company supplied film to edison for five years. between 1892 and 1893, eastman experienced problems with production. because of patent lawsuits in 1893, blair left his american company and established another in britain. eastman supplied edison with film. blair's new company supplied european filmmaking pioneers, including birt acres, robert paul, george albert smith, charles urban, and the lumiere brothers. by 1896 the new movie projector required a fully transparent film base that blair's american operation could not supply. eastman shortly thereafter bought the company out and became the leading supplier of film stock. louis lumiere worked with victor planchon to adapt the lumiere "blue label" (etiquette bleue) photographic plate emulsion for use on celluloid roll film, which began in early 1896. eastman's first motion picture film stock used the same emulsion as its still film, which was orthochromatic. film did not have a strictly defined speed; the orthochromatic stock could be processed under a red safelight. density was checked as development was occurring. until the end of the silent era, several inches were cut from the start of each shot developed to test it. positive stock was slower, finer-grained and of a higher contrast than a negative. from 1895, eastman supplied their motion picture roll film in rolls of 65 feet, while blair's rolls were 75 feet. if longer lengths were needed, the unexposed negative rolls could be cemented in a darkroom, but this was largely undesirable by most narrative filmmakers. actuality films were much more eager to undertake this method, however, in order to depict longer actions, and created cemented rolls as long as 1000 feet. american mutoscope and biograph was the first known company to use this, for the jeffries-sharkey fight on november 3, 1899. ===1900–1919: towards the standard picture film=== as the quantity of film and filmmakers grew, the demand for standardization increased. between 1900 and 1910, film formats gradually became standardized and film stocks improved. a number of film gauges were made. eastman increased the length of rolls to 200 feet without major adjustments to the emulsion, retaining a large market share. lumiere reformulated its stock to match the speed of eastman film, naming it 'etiquette violette' (violet label). blair sold his english company to pathéin 1907 and retired to the us. pathe began to supplement its operation in 1910 by purchasing film prints, stripping the emulsion from the film base and re-coating it. 35mm film began to become the dominant gauge because of the popularity of edison's and lumière's cameras. consumers usually purchased unperforated film and had to punch it by perforators that were often imprecise, causing difficulty in making prints for the opposite perforation format. in 1908, the perforators began to be made by bell and howell. eastman kodak used the bell and howell's machine to perforate its films. in 1909, edison's organization of the motion picture patents trust agreed to what would become the standard: 35 mm gauge, with edison perforations and a 1.33 aspect ratio. the gauge and perforations are almost identical to modern film stock; the full silent ratio is also used as the film gate in movie cameras, although portions of the image are later cropped out in post-production and projection. agfa began to produce motion picture film in 1913, but remained a largely local supplier until world war i boycotts of popular french, american and italian film stocks allowed the ufa film studio to flourish, boosting agfa's orders. a silent home movie on 16mm black-and-white reversal double perforation film stock all film stocks were manufactured on a nitrate film base, which is highly flammable. nitrate film fires were difficult to extinguish. a significant number of fatal accidents occurred in theatrical projection booths, where the heat of the projector lamp made ignition most likely. amateur filmmaking (home movies) slowly developed during this period. kodak developed a heat-resistant 'safety base' for home projection. in 1909, tests showed cellulose diacetate to be a viable replacement base, and kodak began selling acetate-base films the following year in 22 mm widths for edison's work on the home kinetoscope, which was commercially released in 1912. eastman kodak introduced a non-inflammable 35 mm film stock in 1909. the plasticizers used to make the film flexible evaporated quickly, making the film dry and brittle, causing splices to part and perforations to tear. in 1911 the major american film studios returned to using nitrate stock. eileen bowser, the transformation of cinema 1907–1915, charles scribner's sons 1990, p. 74–75. isbn 0-684-18414-1. more amateur formats began to use acetate based film, and several, including kodak's own 16 mm format, were designed specifically to be manufactured with safety base. kodak released cine negative film type e in 1916 and type f (later known as negative film par speed type 1201) in 1917. as both of these orthochromatic films were no faster than previous offerings; the improvements were in granularity and sharpness. ===1920s: diversification of film sensitivity=== film stock manufacturers began to diversify their products. each manufacturer had previously offered one negative stock (usually orthochromatic) and one print stock. in 1920, a variant of type f film known as x-back was introduced to counteract the effects of static electricity on the film, which can cause sparking and create odd exposure patterns on the film. a resin backing was used on the film, which rendered the film too opaque to allow focusing through the back of the film, a common technique for many cameras of that era. the x-back stock was popular on the east coast of the us. other manufacturers were established in the 1920s, including american e.i. dupont de nemours in 1926 and belgian gevaert in 1925. panchromatic film stock became more common. created in 1913 for use in color film processes such as kinemacolor, panchromatic was first used in a black-and-white film for exterior sequences in queen of the sea (1918) and originally available as a special order product. koszarski (1994). p. 140. the stock's increased sensitivity to red light made it an attractive option for day for night shooting. kodak financed a feature in 1922, shot entirely with panchromatic stock, the headless horseman, to promote the film when kodak introduced it as a standard option. panchromatic film stock was expensive and no motion pictures were produced in entirety on it for several years. the cross-cutting between panchromatic and orthochromatic stocks caused continuity problems with costume tones and panchromatic film was often avoided. orthochromatic film remained dominant until the mid 1920s due to kodak's lack of competition in the panchromatic market. in 1925, gevaert introduced an orthochromatic stock with limited color sensitivity and a fully panchromatic stock, pan-23. in 1926, kodak lowered the price of panchromatic stock to parity with its orthochromatic offering and the panchromatic stock began to overtake the orthochromatic stock's market share within a few years. salt (1992). p. 179. "there was apparently some question as to differences in relative contrast between the two stocks. as barry salt notes, "this claim is almost impossible to substantiate now, given the extreme difficulty there is in seeing a reasonable number of original prints of films shot on both stocks." similar panchromatic film stocks were manufactured by agfa and pathé, the shift to panchromatic stocks had largely been completed by 1928, and kodak discontinued orthochromatic stock in 1930. kodak: chronology of motion picture films, 1889 to 1939. ===color films=== experiments with color films were made as early as the late 19th century, but practical color film was not commercially viable until 1908, and for amateur use when kodak introduced kodachrome for 16 mm in 1935 and 8 mm in 1936. before 1941, commercially successful color processes used special cameras loaded with black-and-white separation stocks rather than color negative. kinemacolor (1908–1914), technicolor processes 1 through 4 (1917–1954), and cinecolor used one, two or three strips of monochrome film stock sensitized to certain primary colors or exposed behind color filters in special cameras. technicolor introduced a color reversal stock, called monopack, for location shooting in 1941; it was ultimately a 35 mm version of kodachrome that could be used in standard motion picture cameras. eastman kodak introduced their first 35mm color negative stock, eastman color negative film 5247, in 1950. a higher quality version in 1952, eastman color negative film 5248, was quickly adopted by hollywood for color motion picture production, replacing both the expensive three-strip technicolor process and monopack. ==classification and properties== a short strip of undeveloped 35 mm color negative film. there are several variables in classifying stocks; in practice, one orders raw stock by a code number, based on desired sensitivity to light. ===base=== a piece of film consists of a light-sensitive emulsion applied to a tough, transparent base, sometimes attached to anti-halation backing or "rem-jet" layer (now only on camera films). originally the highly flammable cellulose nitrate was used. in the 1930s, film manufacturers introduced "safety film" with a cellulose triacetate plastic base. all amateur film stocks were safety film, but the use of nitrate persisted for professional releases. kodak discontinued the manufacture of nitrate base in 1951, and the industry transitioned entirely to safety film in 1951 in the united states and by 1955 internationally. since the late 1990s, almost all release prints have used polyester film stock. ===emulsion=== the emulsion consists of silver halide grains suspended in a gelatin colloid; in the case of color film, there are three layers of silver halide, which are mixed with color couplers and interlayers that filter specific light spectra. these end up creating yellow, cyan, and magenta layers in the negative after development. ===chemistry=== development chemicals applied to an appropriate film can produce either a positive (showing the same densities and colors as the subject) or negative image (with dark highlights, light shadows, and, in principle, complementary colors). the first films were darkened by light: negative films. later films that produce a positive image became known as reversal films; processed transparent film of this type can be projected onto a screen. negative images need to be transferred onto photographic paper or other substrate which reverses the image again, producing a final positive image. creating a positive image from a negative film can also be done by scanning the negative to create a computer file which can then be reversed by software. ===image record=== different emulsions and development processes exist for a variety of image recording possibilities: the two most common of which are black and white, and color. however, there are also variant types, such as infrared film (in black and white or false color); specialist technical films, such as those used for x-rays; and obsolete processes, such as orthochromatic film. generally, however, the vast majority of stock used today is "normal" (visible spectrum) color, although "normal" black and white also commands a significant minority percentage. ===physical characteristics=== film is also classified according to its gauge and the arrangement of its perforations— gauges range from 8 mm to 70 mm or more, while perforations may vary in shape, pitch, and positioning. the film is also distinguished by how it is wound with regard to perforations and base or emulsion side, as well as whether it is packaged around a core, a daylight spool, or within a cartridge. depending on the manufacturing processes and camera equipment, lengths can vary anywhere from 25 to 2000 feet. common lengths include 25 feet for 8 mm, 50 feet for super 8, 100 and 400 feet for 16 mm, 400 and 1000 feet for 35 mm, and 1000 for 65/70 mm. ===responsivity=== a critical property of a stock is its film speed, determined by asa or its sensitivity to light listed by a measurement on the raw stock which must be chosen with care. speed determines the range of lighting conditions under which the film can be shot, and is related to granularity and contrast, which influence the look of the image. the stock manufacturer will usually give an exposure index (ei) number equal to the asa which they recommend exposing for. however, factors such as forced or non-standard development (such as bleach bypass or cross processing), compensation for filters or shutter angle, as well as intended under- and over-exposure may cause the cinematographer to actually "rate" the stock differently from the ei. this new rating is not a change to the stock itself — it is merely a way of calculating exposure without figuring out the compensation after each light reading. ===color temperature=== another important quality of color film stock in particular is its color balance, which is defined by the color temperature at which it accurately records white. tungsten lighting is defined at 3200 k, which is considered "warmer" in tone and shifted towards orange; daylight is defined at 5600 k, which is considered "colder" and shifted towards blue. this means that unfiltered tungsten stock will look normal shot under tungsten lights, but blue if shot during daylight. conversely, daylight stock shot in daylight will look normal, but orange if shot under tungsten lights. color temperature issues such as these can be compensated for by other factors such as lens filters and color gels placed in front of the lights. the color temperature of a film stock is generally indicated next to the film speed number — e.g. 500t stock is color film stock with an asa of 500 and balanced for tungsten light; 250d would have an asa of 250 and be balanced for daylight. while black-and-white film has no color temperature itself, the silver halide grains themselves tend to be slightly more responsive to blue light, and therefore will have daylight and tungsten speeds — e.g. kodak's double-x stock is rated 250d/200t, since the tungsten light will give slightly less exposure than an equivalent amount of daylight. ==deterioration== all plastic is subject to deterioration through physical or chemical means, and thus, motion picture film is subject to the same deterioration. cellulose nitrate, cellulose diacetate and triacetate are known to be unstable mediums: improperly preserved film can deteriorate in a period of time much faster than many photographs or other visual presentations. cellulose nitrate, because of its unstable chemistry, eventually breaks down, releasing nitric acid, further catalyzing the decomposition. in the final stages of celluloid decomposition, the film turns into a rust-like powder. likewise, tri-acetate stock is also vulnerable to deterioration. because of the small gauge of the film, owners of home-made films often find that their film can become shrunken and brittle to the point where the film is unwatchable in the space of a few years. in general, decaying acetate film breaks down into acetic acid, and similar to celluloid decomposition, leads to an auto-catylictic breakdown of the base that cannot be reversed. the result of the acetic acid released is a strong odor of vinegar, which is why the decay process in the archival community is known as "vinegar syndrome". modern polyester-based stocks are far more stable by comparison and are rated to last hundreds of years. ==intermediate and print stocks== 35 mm film print frames. at far left and far right, outside the perforations, is the sdds soundtrack as an image of a digital signal. between the perforations is the dolby digital soundtrack (note the tiny dolby "double d" logo in the center of each area between the perforations). just inside the perforations, on the left side of the image, is the analog optical soundtrack, with two channels encoded using dolby sr noise reduction that can be dematrixed into four channels using dolby pro logic. the optical timecode used to synchronize a dts soundtrack, which sits between the optical soundtrack and the image, is not pictured. finally, the image here is an anamorphic image used to create a 2.39:1 aspect ratio when projected through an anamorphic lens. note the thin frame lines of anamorphic prints. the distinction between camera stocks and print stocks involves a difference in the recording process. when the work print or edit master has been approved, the original camera negative (ocn) is assembled by a negative cutter using the edited work print or edl (edit decision list) as a guide. a series of answer prints are then made from the ocn. during the answer print stage, corrections in the film's density and color are corrected (timed) to the filmmakers' tastes. interpositive (ip) prints are struck from the ocn, checked to make sure they look the same as the custom timed answer print, and then each ip is used to make one or more dupe negative (dn) copies. the release prints are then generated from the dn(s). recently, with the development of digital intermediate (di), it has become possible to completely edit, composite visual effects, and color grade the image digitally at full resolution and bit-depth. in this workflow, the answer print is generated digitally and then written out to the ip stage using a laser film printer. due to the specialized nature of the exposure and the higher degree of control afforded by the film lab equipment, these intermediate and release stocks are specially designed solely for these applications and are generally not feasible for camera shooting. because intermediates only function to maintain the image information accurately across duplication, each manufacturer tends to only produce one or two different intermediate stocks. similarly, release print stocks usually are available only in two varieties: a "normal" print or a deluxe print (on more-costly print film like kodak vision premiere) with slightly greater saturation and contrast. ==see also== *direct film *film format *film preservation *fujifilm *kodak *list of film formats *list of motion picture film stocks *color motion picture film *photographic film with emphasis on film for still photography. *orwo *tasma ==references== ===bibliography=== *koszarski, richard (1994). an evening's entertainment: the age of the silent feature picture, 1915-1928, university of california press. isbn 978-0-520-08535-0. *salt, barry (1992). film style and technology: history and analysis. london: starword. ===notes=== ===further reading=== *ascher, steve and edward pincus. the filmmaker's handbook: a comprehensive guide for the digital age. new york: penguin group, 1999. *cinetech. motion picture stock time line, 1999. retrieved 2007-07-09. *fujifilm uk. a brief history of fujifilm, 2001. retrieved 2007-07-09. *fujifilm usa. motion picture chronology, 2001. retrieved 2007-07-09. *kodak. chronology of motion picture films, 2005. retrieved 2009-06-29.
